- There's three types of
fun, fun for the player,
fun for the designer, and
fun for the computer.
- Is it PvP?
- It's all PvP. In fact, Rust is
the most PvP thing in all of PvP.
- Well, I don't know what that means, but...
- Rust players know what that
means. My whole career and my
family are thanks to EverQuest,
so I think I won the game.
And we're idiots. We're reading the
forums, and the forums are just
flaming us all the time. Like,
"There's lag on this server,"
and, "Can't log into that ser-" And
that's, that was our perspective
of what was happening. And
when I showed up at that show,
it... One of the most emotional
things in my life. It was
nothing but an outpouring of love. I had
believed I would never work
any place but Blizzard.
I loved it. It was a part of who I was,
And I felt I was a part of it,
and I literally thought I would
retire from the place. I never thought
the day would come, and that was it.
- How painful was it to say goodbye?
- It broke me.
- Now, meanwhile, as far
as the outside world is
concerned, you've disappeared
off the face of the
earth, but you were
actually working on a game.
The following is a conversation
with Jeff Kaplan, a
legendary game designer
of World of Warcraft and
Overwatch, which are two of the biggest,
most influential games ever made. He is
genuinely one of the most
amazing human beings I've ever
met. In the many conversations I was
fortunate enough to have with him,
including while playing video
games, he was always kind,
thoughtful, hilarious,
and still and forever a
legit gamer, through
and through. Of course,
he's always quick to celebrate the
incredible teams of creative minds he has
gotten a chance to work with over
the years, and they are truly
incredible. Blizzard has created
some of the greatest games ever
made, games that to me
personally have brought me
thousands of hours of fun, meaning, and
happiness, from Warcraft,
to StarCraft, to Diablo,
WoW, Overwatch and more. So
for that, a big thank you to
Jeff, to the entire
Blizzard team, and to every
creative mind in the video game
industry, giving their heart and soul
to build video game worlds that we fans get
a chance to enjoy. This was a super fun,
inspiring, whirlwind conversation, pun
intended, with one of the
most beloved gamers and game
designers ever. Full of memes, lulz,
wisdom, emotional rollercoaster
moments, and of course, Blizzard
video game lore. Jeff left Blizzard in
2021, and has been secretly
working on a new video game
called The Legend of California that I
got a chance to play with Jeff. It is
incredibly beautiful.
Set in the 1800s Gold
Rush era of California, it's an
open world online multiplayer game,
part adventure and action, part
survival. Sometimes creating
a feeling of loneliness and
desperation, and sometimes
just awe watching the
sun rise over a beautiful landscape.
It's unlike any game that
Jeff has ever worked on, and
it's a game that I genuinely
can't wait to play with all of
you. You can wishlist it on
Steam. Join the alpha later in March, I
think, and early access is on the way. This
is the Lex Fridman Podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description
where you can also find links to
contact me, ask questions,
give feedback, and so
on. And now, dear friends, here's Jeff
Kaplan. You were first a legendary video
game player, in particular in EverQuest,
before you ever became a legendary video
game designer on World of Warcraft and on
Overwatch, which I think is a wild
journey to go through from gamer to
designer. But first, let's go way
back. When did you first fall in
love with video games?
- I was lucky. I was born in
that golden era of coin-op.
So, I literally remember
the first time seeing
Pac-Man. I was with my Uncle
Ronnie, and he just kept
feeding me quarters. I think he wanted
to play, but was too scared to,
so he, you know, his little nephew, he would
just give him quarters to play Pac-Man.
I remember being at my
brother's graduation in
Philadelphia, and they had
an Asteroids machine in the
lobby. That was one of the first
coin-op machines I had played as
well. And my brother
and I would... we would
try to get the high score, and we'd
finally get it. But we had to go to
bed early 'cause we were little kids.
And then in the morning somebody
else had like beat our high
score. And then, you know, I
grew up in Southern California in the '80s.
I was born in '72. So, you know, I was a
kid with that skateboard BMX culture where
we'd ride two towns over.
We knew all the pizza
parlors and liquor stores
and arcades, and we
just lived in that coin-op
phase. That was, that
was where the love started.
And then you started to
see things like Pong. You'd go over
to a friend's house, they'd have
Pong, and it was just mind blowing,
like, we're playing this thing on the
TV and it was so much fun. Atari
was a big thing at that time as
well. But the big one for me was actually
Intellivision, because
my dad was an executive
recruiter, and one of
his clients was Mattel.
And he said, "Hey, I... They gave
me this thing," and he would get
discounts or free games. And my brothers
and I just loved Intellivision. Like,
we would just play it
endlessly. And the comparison
was always like, "Is this game
close to what's in the arcades?"
And it was just such a
golden era. And I think
the big moment where it really blew open
and kind of hit the next level was
when the NES came out. And that, like,
NES with Super Mario- was kind of
gaming at the next level at that
point. And I have, like,
warm, fuzzy memories
even thinking about it to
this day. I remember we
played Super Mario for weeks,
my brothers and I, and then
I had a friend come over, and he
showed me all the secret stuff-
... in Super that I didn't
know existed at the
time. And it's... it was like suddenly, the
world opened up more and games could be
more. And then there was, like, a
big PC gaming push that hit me. My
parents ran their own business. Like
I said, my dad was an executive
recruiter, and they bought an IBM. And this
is, like, when it was DOS before MS-DOS
existed. And I was so disappointed,
because, like, other kids had the
Amiga or the Commodore-
... which, you know, they were better
for gaming than the IBM at the time. And
my mom, she really encouraged my
brother and I. She bought a Zork.
You know, it was just Infocom word games,
and where your imagination
would take you. Like,
Zork holds a place in my heart I
think few games will ever touch.
- It's a text-based game?
- Text-based game. You know, you just type
in, "Go west. Open mailbox." You know?
And...
- Okay.
- But it's that power of imagination. It's
why the book is always better than the
movie, you know?
- Yeah. So, you're starting to see these
creations of worlds that you can navigate.
- Yes.
- You can step into this world and you
can lose yourself in that world.
- Yeah. You're transported.
You're living there.
- Was Zork popular?
- Zork was insanely popular. And then
there was Zork II- ... and Zork III.
- A trilogy. Zork trilogy. I see it. Okay.
- A- and it was weird, and, like, the... Sometime
in the '90s, there was this, there was this
era of what they called CD-ROM
games. That's how they branded
them. And they made a return to
Zork, but it now had graphics.
And somehow, that just shattered
everything, because the Zork you
knew in your head didn't
exist anymore. Yeah, Zork was
fantastic. I think it might be open source
now, which I think is fabulous. But
I highly recommend Zork. There was
also, in those days, on the PC that
worked on our IBM, was Ultima-
... which was the Richard Garriott series.
And he was Lord British. We knew him
as Lord British. He put himself in the
game. And you wanna talk
about world- building. You
know, there was Yew Forest and
there was all the characters. And
the first Ultima I played was Ultima
II, 'cause Ultima I was before
my time. And that series,
it was this RPG group based
PC game, and the worlds were just so
rich. Like, you could get on a rocket
ship. You're playing in this fantasy
world, fighting demons,
and yet somehow you could
get on a rocket ship. And then
there was just all of this
sort of crazy stuff that would happen in
games that are based in the world.
Like, there were bouncers in the towns,
and merchants, but if you really
wanted to, you could try to rob
these people, or kill
Lord British, you know?
That was something that was super
hard. And when you're just a jackass
kid, you spend your time
endlessly trying to do these
things over and over, and Ultima was really
a profound kind of experience for me.
- And, of course, that led to Ultima
Online, which is a legendary game in
itself, perhaps connected to EverQuest.
- Yes.
- Sort of starting to build these
worlds that are massively
multiplayer online video
games. Can you take me to
that journey? Like, as you
started to get online, MMO world.
What were influential?
What were fun for you?
- Well, the big one for
me was EverQuest. But,
Like you mentioned, Ultima
Online sort of was the
predecessor. It came before EverQuest.
And it was, like, one of those
unfortunate times in my life where I
was actually at grad school.
- You were busy.
- I was busy, and I missed
Ultima Online. Like, I
would have had that experience.
And when you hear the Ultima
Online stories, they're
some of the craziest,
funniest... You know, I know
somebody who, they learned
how to poison in the
game, and then they would
poison apples, then leave them on the
ground, and somebody else would be
adventuring, then feed the apple to
their horse and kill their horse.
Then they'd steal all their stuff
and... You know, Ultima Online was kind
of... It was the earliest grief-based
experiment. Really, like, when you're treating
the humans like ants in the ant farm.
That was kind of Ultima Online.
- Yeah.
- My first, like, what online gaming, what
defined online gaming for me was Quake
and Doom and Duke Nukem. You
know, it started with Doom
and they had a ... You could
basically LAN. You could
network with your friends or you could
connect with a modem and hook up with
somebody. And that was like a
mind-blowing ... Just seeing
another entity in a video
game and saying, "That's a
person on the other side of that."
That was magical, like, that that
moment happened and that person
could be in another room
or across town from
you. And Quake kind of took it to the next
level. Like, that's where
everybody knew what they were
doing. The systems were more refined.
And this Quake community formed with
all of these, you know,
great websites, mods. The
community was divided into ... There
were two castes of players. The low ping
bastards, the LPBs- ... and
then the rest of us, you know.
And I remember rolling into
Quake matches, you know, on a
dial-up modem with a 300 ping connection,
and I thought it was the
greatest thing ever. Um,
and just, just connecting
with people. Like
I said, the websites. To
this day, the only gaming
website I read— I don't read any of the
news sites anymore, but I read Blue's News.
Which was like, like ... Someone
actually teased me recently.
I linked him a story. I'm like, "Oh, did you
hear this new thing's coming out?" And I sent
the link, and they're like, "Dude,
this is from Blue's News. Like,
what time machine did you just
step out of?" And guy named
Stephen Heaslip... I'm probably
pronouncing his name wrong. I
apologize, but it was actually through
that site that I learned about EverQuest.
They had those programmer plan
updates, the .plan files. And guys
like Carmack would ... You
know, they'd post about
what code they were writing or
how they had optimized something,
or just their personal life.
Like, you know, the Ferrari talk
would always happen—
once they had achieved
success. And there was an id
programmer named Brian Hook,
and he said, "I'm leaving id to go work
at Verant," which became
Sony Online, "to work on
this game called EverQuest." And I
was like, "How does anybody leave id,
the greatest institution
in all of gaming ever,
to work on any other game?"
I'm like, "This guy must be
crazy. Or whatever this EverQuest thing
is, I need to see it. I
need to know what's going
on." And if he hadn't have made that post,
I never would have checked out EverQuest.
- We'll talk about EverQuest, but
since you mentioned Carmack and,
uh, Quake, what can we say about
the genius of John Carmack?
Why was he such an important and
influential human in the history of gaming?
- Those early geniuses at id ...
Like, I wouldn't be sitting here
talking to you right now if they
hadn't had the breakthroughs that they
had at the time. Um, gaming engines were
evolving, but the level of breakthrough
that they achieved with Wolf
3D, that was the first... I remember
playing Wolfenstein when it was a 2D game.
You'd run around. You'd dress up as
a German. You'd throw a grenade.
Um, to see it in 3D ... And
it, it's funny. You look
back at the screenshots or
videos of it now, and it
seems almost childish. Like, "Oh, why, why
were you so excited about
that?" And you were
transported. There ... It
was the intimacy of first
person. You know, putting the
hands in front of you, holding the
gun, being transported to Nazi Germany,
but you're the hero fighting the Nazis.
And then the evolution. Like,
when Doom came out, I'm
a huge Army of Darkness fan. Like,
one of my favorite movies of all
time. And I was like, "This is Army of
Darkness, the video game." You
know? Like, "Give me the boom
stick. Here we go." And the graphical
advances ... But it, it wasn't just how
the game looked, it was how it played.
The smoothness kept getting
better. The responsiveness the
sharpness of the gameplay.
You have to credit
id in those days and
Carmack and Romero. Um,
I ... As somebody who worked on
an FPS, I ... That wouldn't have
existed without them.
Credit where credit's due.
- And by the way, we should say you're ...
As a gamer, your range is incredible. You
are a legit first-person
shooter gamer, but you also
obviously love the more MMO world,
rich, exploratory kinda game. So it's
fascinating. But yeah, there is ...
On the technology stack that brought
something like Quake or
Wolfenstein 3D to life,
there's a threshold which
you pass of realism
where you can immerse yourself into that
world. I had the same exact experience
with, uh, Wolfenstein 2D taking
a step to 3D, and it was like
tears in my eyes. Like,
"This is incredible."
Like, my memories of Wolfenstein
3D is it was like ultra
realistic. It's silly to say now. .
It was the feeling like you were
there.Yeah, what an incredible
age. And some of that, the
storytelling, a lot of that
is the- technology that brings
that kind of 3D world to life.
It's incredible. But
before- we get too far
on that tangent you mentioned
grad school. We should
mention that you have a master's
degree in creative writing from
NYU, and you wanted to be a writer.
You told me your main influences were
Kerouac, but also Hemingway,
Salinger, Bukowski,
Orwell. What drew you
to storytelling in that
medium of writing? What
aspect of the human
experience were you trying
to put down on paper?
- Well, it started with being a
fan first and being inspired
and reading, and it's the, not only being
transported to a different world or into
a different person, but also, you know,
the way that stories can touch
emotions in you and trigger feelings
sometimes you didn't even know you had.
And that was very appealing for me. And
the big challenge with it
is, and I think this is
for anybody who creates anything,
is putting yourself out there.
Um, to some degree,
there's a lot of ego that
goes into that moment where you say,
"Well, I've been reading, you know, 1984
or Green Hills of Stranglethorn, and
I think it's amazing. And now I'm
gonna try to write something
that somebody is gonna read."
Uh, that's a giant leap of faith. You
know, that's a moment of putting yourself
out there completely, and there's
gotta be some part of that
that's ego. There's some part
of it that's masochistic.
Um, and I think for people
who want to create and build
stuff, they can't help but to
do it. You don't really have an
option. That's just how you're
wired, and you're gonna do it
anyway. And, you know, I admire
people like Dickinson who can just
write all the poems and leave them
in a drawer to be discovered
by somebody else.
You know, that's one way to go about it.
- Yeah, Franz Kafka, you know, a lot
of the stories he wrote, never
published, and he asked
for all of them to be
destroyed. And then it's only because of
his friend that ignored his request that we
even have many of his stories.
It's like to be that kinda... I
mean, clearly, there's some
masochism there, some tortured soul.
But then there's also the ego like you
mentioned. I was entertained by this story of
James Joyce, When he was a young man,
18, 19, Declared that he's going
to be the greatest writer of the
20th century. And he turned out
in many, in the eyes of many
to be one of the greatest writers of
the 20th century. But there's, like,
millions of kids just like
James Joyce, writers, they're
declaring exactly that, that turn
out not to be. But that is in
some cases, in many cases, maybe most
cases, you have to have that ego-
... to say, "I'm gonna..." Yeah, right.
"I read 1984," "and I'm going to write
the next 1984."
- Yeah. And I do think ego
is a big part of it.
it's one of the many lessons
I've learned. Hearing your Kafka
story is funny, because fast-forwarding
to how my writing career ended—
... I literally threw away
everything, I mean, in a dumpster. I
used to keep copious
notes, like journals, my
writing journals, everything I
ever read, every story idea.
I probably had 20 volumes of just
handwritten notes. And then I also kept
personal journals of just, you know,
to keep the writing habit up of
just, you know, what happened in
my day, how I was feeling, all of
that. And then either digitally or
typed, I had all of my manuscripts, and
I threw it all in the dumpster.
- What was that decision? Do you remember that
decision? What was that- what was that like
to just take that part of your life
and just put it in a dumpster?
- Yeah. It was I think it was necessary.
It was necessary. This is like
rationalizing it after the fact,
you know, which is easy to do.
You know? But at the time, I think I
was so broken and so defeated with
failure that I needed the moment. It
was like throwing in the towel for
a boxer, you know? It's that moment of
like, "I'm not gonna win this fight,
and you need to move on
from it." And if there was
any element of that sitting around,
I'd be tempted to try again or bring
it out of the drawer 10 years later.
- We should mention that
you did give it a- a real
try. You've mentioned receiving
over 170 rejection letters in
one year when submitting your stories.
So there's a lot of rejection.
So it was a long chain of rejection. And
then what was that like, the rejection?
- It was hard. Um, I had
moved from New York.
Um, I did the most terrible dumb thing
that I knew I was doing at the time. I
had a really great group of
writer friends from grad
school in New York, and I think
writing is a very lonely,
solitary thing. But weirdly,
writers kind of support each
other and just, "Who do you give the
story to?" You know, you don't wanna give
it to your mom or dad, you know. You
kinda wanna give it to somebody who's
gonna really punch you in the nose
and tell you what's wrong with
it. And I had left that writing
circle to move back to California.
- Did you take a bunch of drugs, take
your typewriter and drove across, uh-
- No.
- ... across the United States and
then wrote a book about it? Or
just to take Kerouac as an example.
Anyway, sorry. You went just-
- I might have been more
successful had- ... I done that.
- Uh, so sorry. So you went back.
- So I moved back to California,
and I did it for a girl.
And I think within two months of moving
back, we were broken up. So... And
I knew it when I was standing in my
studio apartment when it was empty in New York
and I was about to close the door for the
last time. I had that like, you know,
little me on the shoulder saying,
"Dude, what are you doing?"
"This... You're making one of those
epic life mistakes that is gonna come
back to haunt you." And I ended up alone
in California, and I think it was a good
three years that I structured my
life where I was gonna write
for eight hours a day, because
it's that writer's habit. Like
you have to just force yourself,
"This is a job. This isn't a
hobby. Whether I like it or
not, rain or shine, sick or
healthy, I'm gonna write for
eight hours a day." And I did. Um, I was
fortunate. Like I said, my dad
had his company and he hired
me as a research associate.
So I was calling up
generating name lists for a recruiting
company, and I would take...
Whenever there was East Coast assignments, I would
take those so I could start at like 5:00 in the
morning. And I created
all this space for me to
write, and I just... I
had a dog named Jack-
... who was... He was a Jack Russell
Terrier. And so everybody's like, "You're a
writer, you named your Jack Russell Terrier
Jack." I'm like, "Because I named him
after Jack Kerouac." "It's
poetic and epic," and-
- Yeah, of course
- ... I just looked like a dumbass,
but- ... it was just me and this
dog. And I was writing, you know, all that
time intensely. And this was mid to late
'90s, so even though
internet existed, email
was very primitive and you had to send
a manuscript off, like printed paper-
... to all... Like, I was trying to get
short stories published in literary
magazines, and you had to send envelope
with return self-address stamp. So it was
expensive, too. Like if you
didn't have money, you were
just... There was a cost to it-
... to every single one of them.
- You had to pay for the rejection letter
that you would eventually receive.
- Yeah. And the, like, big thing
that you were hoping for
was that the editor would write you a
note with the rejection letter. Like, um-
- Keep going.
- Yeah. And you'd like cling onto
this. Like, it was like, "Oh,
Glimmer Train said, you know, showing
promise." You know, and you just hang
onto that for like a week, you know,
pretending like that
was... But it was just
soul crushing. And I really
stuck... And I became
more and more isolated. Part of that was
leaving that group of
writing friends in New
York. I'm prone to just
introversion anyway.
The type of person I am. Breaking
up with the girlfriend at the time.
I just sort of fell into that world
of like all I was doing was writing.
And it broke me. Like, I went into very
deep and heavy depression. I drank too
much. I really had a problem
with alcohol. And all those
things compounded into just
deep, deep depression. And
I don't... There wasn't like a magic
rejection that broke me. That
would have been epic if like-
... someone out there is like, "The
dude who..." "I'm the dude who broke
Jeff that one day."
But I just had a moment where I
said, "This is gonna destroy me."
And... Like, I don't want to be
discouraging to anybody, because I
really do believe, like you hear it so
much, like, "You have to work
for your dreams, never give up."
Like, we're trained this way.
Like, "Never give up." The
universe... Actually, maybe not
the universe. A group of editors
at literary magazines
across the United States
was telling me it was time to give up as
a writer, like I wasn't cut out for it.
And I stopped.
- Sometimes, you know, closing a door
is required for another door to open.
That's one of the hardest
things to do, is to walk away.
- Yeah. And I think, rightly so, our
parents, our coaches, our
mentors train us not to give up.
And I think a lot of us take
pride in that, "I'm never
gonna give up. I'm gonna
do this come hell or high
water." And sometimes there's that
reality, especially when
you're now in your mid-20s,
where you have that moment of like,
"Am I really gonna be this? Like, am
I ever gonna sort of find the light
here?" And, maybe, and it's so hard, it's
so hard to have this moment, "Maybe
this isn't my calling in life,"
especially when you don't know
what the next calling is gonna be.
- That's so painful. It's 'cause
you've invested so much
of yourself, of who you are, of the
dreams you've had, of this just
whole conception of yourself, and
you're watching yourself slide
down in terms of becoming
isolated, suffering more and
And then you just have to
somehow figure out how to-
get out of that. And it is true. In
that situation, the way to get out
is the dumpster. Is to
cut it off. Is there
advice you can extract from that?
There's a lot of young folks who are
in that same situation.
- Yeah. This is one of
those hindsight things
where, you know, having gone through
it and ended up okay on the other
side, which you don't know at
the time, you know? When you're
a young person in your
late teens or early 20s,
there's so much pressure
on you. And I really think
adults don't help. You
know? Every time you run
into the younger nephew
or whoever and you start
to say things like, "Oh, what's your
major? What are you gonna do with that?"
"What do you wanna be?" It's such bullshit
to do to a human being. You know?
- You're so lost in the world. I
mean, most of us are lost our
entire lives, but especially in
your 20s, you know, like, you're
lost. So the questions like, yeah, "What
are you, what are you doing? What's your
major? What's the career?" And
so on, that's not the point,
man. I'm trying to find,
I'm trying to move through the world,
I'm trying to run through the world to
find the thing that sparks my
heart, to find the passion, to
find what I'm meant to
be on this earth for.
And there are really, I mean,
that is a real hero's journey of
searching as a young
person. That's a real,
like, you know, all the
adults, with their wisdom,
they've stopped searching often. They've
done the lazy, the comfortable thing.
They found their thing. And so now they
look back, they don't
remember how much suffering
and how, how much uncertainty that
young people have to deal with.
- It's, there's confusion,
there's pressure. Like, the
pressure we exert on younger people for
having it figured out is, it's insane.
So the advice that I always give,
and it sounds so stupid, like
this sounds really trite, but
focus on what you wanna do, not what
you wanna be. The, the pressure that
society kind of puts on us is, you know,
"Oh, do you wanna be an astronaut? Do you
wanna be a firefighter? Do you wanna be a
writer? Do you wanna be a game maker?" And
I think we get lost in the trappings of,
like a vision of what that role is- ...
and how to perform as a fake actor in that
role. Versus when you're off the clock
and no one's asking you any questions-
... you know, you're not at Thanksgiving
dinner and your uncle's pressuring you
into, you know, what your future's
gonna be for the rest of your
life. When you go home,
how do you spend your
time? Like, what makes you happy?
What brings you fulfillment?
And through those paths,
you're gonna find out
what you're gonna become, not what you
wanna be. It's, "What do you wanna do?"
- What do you wanna do? The thing
that brings you joy on a moment
by moment basis. Yeah.
That's brilliantly put. And
speaking of which, that's
where you took the pivot.
You switched to video games. How did
that happen? Gradually? Suddenly?
- Gradually and suddenly. So when I had that
fateful moment where I just
sort of gave up with writing,
I had these days where I'd
structure eight-hour chunks
of just, this was writing time,
you know? I'd sit solitary
typing. All that was gone.
And, you know, I could still
support myself, which was
nice. And then I had this free
time and I wasn't spending it with anybody,
I was just alone. Me and the dog, Jack.
And I just poured it all into EverQuest.
You know, I, it was 1999 when that
game came out. And I had a friend,
Victor, like kind of a lifelong friend.
One of the few friends I had who
played computer games, 'cause
there was a stigma to that.
You know? It wasn't, you didn't walk
around telling people you played
games. They thought you wasted
your time. And my friend,
Vic, had bought EverQuest. I'm like,
"That's that game that that guy Brian
Hook went to work on. Is it good?" And he's
like, "Yeah, you gotta play it." And the
moment I logged in, I was just transported.
It was the world of Norrath. And
it wasn't just the world itself and
how it looked, I thought the game was
gorgeous, it was the mechanics,
you know, that I was this halfling
rogue that, you know, had to go out and
adventure in the world, and when I killed
stuff, I got experience, and I needed
better loot to kill more stuff
to get more experience. And
the sort of draw of progression in
the game it was amazing. I, and I
just lived my life of, "I
can't wait 'til the next time
I log in." There was a lot of escapism
going. It wasn't all healthy. When all was
said and done, when I finally
had quit EverQuest three days
later, you could type in
the command /played to see
how much played time you had. I had, I
think it was like 272 played days in three
years. So you start to do the
math on like, how much time-
... in those three years I was living
in that world. It was...It was kind of
insane.
- Well, that's over 6,000
hours- ... of gameplay.
Wow. So here going to
Perplexity, EverQuest
is a long-running 3D fantasy,
massively multiplayer online
role-playing game, MMORPG,
set in the world of
Norrath, as you were saying.
First released in March 1999,
it is an online role-playing game
where thousands of players create
characters, group up, and explore
a persistent shared world.
It's widely regarded as one
of the foundational MMORPGs,
helping define raid content,
guild systems and 3D online
worlds. That's the other component
of it. There's... It's all humans
and they group up- ... and they
raid together in the game.
- Yep. In the context of EverQuest, raiding
is usually around 30 people or more
getting together to conquer
something that you couldn't beat
otherwise. And to do successful
raiding, you usually needed
to join what in EverQuest
everyone referred to
as an Uber Guild. So I
had this great pride in my EverQuest
journey that I... Most of the
time leveling up I was
unguilded or I was in like a
role-playing guild with rogues only. And
it was when I got to Level 50 in EverQuest
was the top level, I got invited into this
guild called Legacy of
Steel, which on our server
was the top. Every server had a top guild.
And I was on a server called The
Nameless Server, and the top
guild was Legacy of Steel.
And that, the thrill of
getting 30 people together to go
see if you could beat, you know,
Nagafen, who was the fire dragon,
or Vox, who was the frost dragon,
and needing perfect
coordination to pull it off,
it was insane how fun. Like, you
would literally scream out. You're
alone in your room at home-
... but you felt like you were there
with these people and you would
audibly cheer out when you won, and
you'd feel depressed when you lost, and
it was a game of high highs
and low lows, and it did
everything right. It was amazing.
- So that was a big leap for you to
go from the proud lone warrior
to a member of a guild, Uber Guild.
And then there's that epic
story of you rising to the
top to become the leader
of this Uber Guild.
- The leader... Yeah. So organizing
people in an online game
like EverQuest is like herding cats-
... 'cause, you know, everyone has their
own will. Some people are loot motivated,
some people want the guild to do
well, some people are just lonely
and want people to hang out with. And
there was also a lot of depression in the
EverQuest community. It was something I
suffered with, but a lot of
people, you know, anytime you're
feeling sad or down,
you're looking for escape.
And one of the great things video
games brings us is escapism.
And escapism isn't always bad or negative-
... but when you sort of
abuse it to escape your real
life problems, it's bad and negative.
- So there's a mix of pain and
darkness that pain can manifest as-
... all part of this community.
- Yeah. And what's weird is you enter the
cycle where being with other people
gives you comradery and relief and
makes you feel like you're
not doing so bad in life,
but you can quickly enter a cycle of...
But then you're withdrawing from life
and it makes you feel that way more
to where you can only get the fix
from the game at that point. So it's...
Psychologically, there's
a lot going on there.
- And so you had to work with all of
that. You have to get a bunch of
people together to do a raid, who are all
human beings going through complicated
psychological journeys of their
own. Some are talking shit, some are
just quietly lonely, just
looking for some loot.
- In the late '90s, everyone
was talking shit.
You know what I mean? Like, the gaming
culture was just a different thing
back then. But it was a great
group. It was super fun. It
was people from all walks of
life. And to coordinate these
people, like you just had
to repeat everything like 200 times.
Like, "Okay, we're gonna port from North
Ro. Everybody get to North Ro." And
then you'd have to repeat that for
like six hours-
... to have any chance of like 20%
of the people showing up in North
Ro. And I sort of like... At
first I joined the guild, I was
just like the bright-eyed, bushy-
tail. Like, I was like one of the few
rogues in the guild. I just wanted to
be helpful. I really admired
the people running the
guild. Like, we had a great guild leader.
and it was just a really
fun experience. And, you
know, the guild leader
one day just disappeared.
Like, he quit and he was going
through, you know, his own
thing, and that's what would happen in
EverQuest. Like, people would just kinda
disappear all of a sudden. There
wasn't a, "Hey, in about a month, I'm
gonna stop playing because
I'm starting this new job."
People... people had to quit in
some dramatic way, where they
just disappear, and basically,
our guild leader stopped playing.
- Did you miss them when they disappeared?
Like, we should say that most
of the people, maybe all of them,
were anonymous. So you just-
...have a username, and you don't
really say who you are in real life.
- Absolutely. In those days,
there was a great stigma to
mentioning your, any
real-life info. You just kind
of kept it all really close to
your chest, and you never knew
who was male or female. You kind
of assumed everybody was male.
- Safe assumption.
- And then it was a surprise if
they were actually female.
Like my wife, for example,
that's how I met her.
- You met her in EverQuest?
- I met her in EverQuest.
- That is a true love story, right there.
- Yeah. Yeah.
- Wow.
- The funny part for me with
EverQuest is, you know, you
play a game as much as I played EverQuest,
and people are like, "You threw years of your
life away." Like, "You can't win
a game like that." And I'm like,
"I don't know, like, sitting here today, my
whole career and my family are thanks to
EverQuest, so I think I won the game."
- Yeah, yeah. You're like the,
the, "Well, actually..." guy.
- Well, yeah, exactly.
- Your life will be on the Wikipedia page
somewhere that says, "Well, here's an
example of somebody-" "...
why video games are awesome."
Yeah, I mean, some of it... I should
mention this as an aside. For me and many
people I know, yes, it's hundreds
of hours, but some of the
happiest hours and days of my life. Like,
looking back, it all worked
out. During it, you are
pretty low, and you think, "I... What am
I doing with my life?" All that kind of
stuff. But, like, looking back,
just the all-nighters you pull
playing a particular video game,
allowing yourself to really fully be
immersed seeing the sun come up, and by
the way, many of those games, for me, were
Blizzard games. It's just an incredible
thing that video games have been
able to do. I think you know, it used
to be, and still is somewhat the
case, that books do that
kind of same thing. They-
...they take you on a journey.
But video games, for a long
time, you're right, they
had a stigma. Like,
I couldn't tell people. I felt like I
was doing, like, heroin or something.
Like, I felt like I was doing this
secret, dark thing. It's usually in
the... It's, it usually is
in the dark. There's just a
secretive nature to it, like I'm doing
something really dark and shady.
- It wasn't mainstream.
- It wasn't.
- It wasn't... There was a stigma
to it. And one of the weirdest
parts of that is, you know, I
mentioned, like, you could type in the
/played in EverQuest. Well, if you
did the /played on how much TV people
watch, what would that
look like? It would blow-
...6,000 hours out of
the water, easily. Well,
it... 20 years ago it would
have. You know? Not today.
- Now it's the phone, yeah. Yeah. But then
it is hard to say goodbye to that world.
Those are also really painful times.
How hard was it to say goodbye for you?
- To EverQuest? It was really hard. And
there were times where you try to quit.
- Oh, you took a break sometimes?
- Yeah. You think you're quitting for good.
You'd have those moments of, like, "I'm
doing this too much. I need
to move on in life. I'm
gonna put it down and walk away, and
hopefully not come back." And there were
times where you did come
back. When I finally did
leave EverQuest, it was
actually extremely easy,
because I was psychologically done
with the game at the time. It was
not shortly, but not too
long after a new expansion
had come out. At the time,
it was Shadows of Luclin.
Which didn't speak to me like
the expansions before. Like, the
one before that was called Scars
of Velious, which was an amazing
expansion. And I had gotten the job
at Blizzard, and I guess I'm just an
obsessive person. So all the time and
energy that I had put into EverQuest, the
second, you know, the second
my first minute started at
Blizzard, that was my new obsession.
- So speaking of which, you have to tell
the epic origin story of how you got
the job at Blizzard. As we said, you were
this legendary gamer, and now legendary
troll, on EverQuest. Username, Tigole. You
gave a lot of edgy feedback to the devs,
Telling them in now famous...
There's several rants.
There's a famous one where
you tell many of them to do a
bunch of things, including to pull
their heads out of their asses.
You were loved and respected
because you gave a lot of specific
ways that the game could be improved. And that's
an important thing to say. You weren't just
talking shit. You actually really
loved and cared for the game, and
you gave them, in the language of
the time advice on how to improve,
Their game. And it's funny,
because, like, you look back to
those messages, it's inspiring to
me. It should be informative and inspiring
to a lot of people, because you're
really, legit, full-time talking shit. And
now, and you always have
been, like, one of the
kindest, most loved human
beings in the entire gaming
industry. Anyway, how did that lead
to you getting a job at Blizzard?
- So when the first guild leader left,
Legacy of Steel, the founder... He,
he was a guy named... His online
name was Dread. That was his
name. He left, and our guild was kind
of in this listless spin for a while.
And eventually, somebody
stepped up and took
his position as guild leader, and
that person's name was Ariel-
... who was this blonde
wood elf warrior, Female,
who always refused to wear a helmet
because they thought their character was
so pretty, wanted to show their
face all the time. So Ariel
was a great guild leader
for us, and made me
like an assistant guild leader, raid
leader, officer type in the guild. And over
time, Ariel got busier and busier, and,
you know, would send me messages like,
"Hey, I'm not gonna be online, you
know, tomorrow," or, "I'm not gonna be
online tonight. Can you run the
raid? Can you run the raid?"
And running the raids was very natural for
me. And it was my first experience with
leadership in my life, of like how do
you motivate people? Like, what does
motivation look like? What does
discipline look like? How do
you inspire people? When
do you force people versus
encourage them, you know?
So it was a learning
experience for me on the fly, and
I had the safety net of the real
guild leader would log in eventually.
- I should mention, I'm just now reading
about, doing a bunch of
research on Justinian
of the Roman Empire, and he rose
from being a peasant to being
emperor, so I see a lot of parallels
in your life journey, from
peasant to emperor, but
go ahead, I'm sorry.
- At least EverQuest guild
leader, that's- that's as much-
- Uber guild leader-
- ... as I could say.
- Uber guild leader.
- Uber guild leader. Best guild
on the Nameless server.
So as time went on, Ariel became
busier and busier, and then one
day, they contacted me and we
were having this like whisper
back and forth, and they said, "You- you're
gonna have to take over the guild. I'm just too
busy." And then it came out
later ... Well, let me back up a
second. I started fooling around ... Like
around this time Half-Life 1 had come out,
and with both Duke Nukem
and Half-Life 1, one of the
incredible things that those companies
did back in the day was when they
shipped the game, they
shipped the editor on the CD.
And if you were curious enough, you
could like fire up that editor and
fool around with it.
So I made a Duke Nukem
level, and you'd send
it off to like those UK
programming magazines, and you know,
you'd get excited because your
level was in, you know, some random
magazine. And then I started
making like Half-Life levels. And
Ariel had stepped down as guild
leader. I had become guild leader.
And then at one point,
Ariel contacts me and
says, "Hey, you know, you were
talking about those Half-Life
levels you made. I want to
see those." I'm like, "Oh,
that's cool." Like, "I didn't know you played
Half-Life." Like, "Yeah, maybe we can get
a server up and I can play
them." And Ariel tells me,
"No, mail them to this
address in Irvine." And-
because I— again, to rewind
in the time machine for a
second, to send something like a Half-Life
level over the internet would have-
... taken like 12 hours.
So you actually like burned it onto
a CD and stuck it in the mail.
So I put my Half-Life levels,
I sent them to Ariel, and
he says, "You know, my name's Rob. I'm
a designer at Blizzard Entertainment."
"Um, we're— I— I hear you're in
Pasadena 'cause you mentioned
it." You know, I would write about,
you know, the Rose Parade and
all these things on our website. You
know, I kind of ... It was blogging
before blogging existed, so he knew I lived
in Pasadena, and he's like, "Irvine's
only an hour away. Why
don't you come down, see
Blizzard, and you can also meet..." and he
names like four people in the
guild. And I'm like, "They all
work at Blizzard too?" He's
like, "Yeah, we're all
Blizzard." And it was so weird because
during that era, I didn't have
a lot of money. It was not
like ... Kind of nowadays it feels
like everybody plays every game,
but you had to be selective. So
like I never bought StarCraft
or Diablo or Warcraft.
I was much more of the
Half-Life, Quake, Quake
III guy around that
time, and I'd never played
a Blizzard game, and I just
got invited to like go to
Blizzard Entertainment.
- Was Blizzard already legendary,
you know, with the Warcraft and
StarCraft? Is it... Is there...
Is it... Was it building this
like great legend of this game
company that seemingly doesn't miss?
- It was very much on its way to
enshrining itself as being one of the
legendary game... Like, it was beloved—
... by gamers, but there were
still ignorant people like me who
hadn't played, you know, War II or Diablo
II or StarCraft, which
was shocking to people.
- So you weren't like
freaking out, freaking out?
- No, I— I was freaking out in a
different sense. I'm like, "Am
I gonna get mugged when I-" Like,
"Who are ... Is this a scam?"
Because you didn't meet
people off the internet.
So I drove down there. Um, I ended
up... There was— there was Rob Pardo—
... who at that time was the
lead designer on Warcraft
III, and he was Ariel.
You know, so okay, it
wasn't a woman after all.
It wasn't this blonde wood
elf. You know, I don't know
what you expect at that point.
It was Rob Pardo. To this
day, a great friend of
mine named Scott Mercer
was the enchanter in our
EverQuest guild, a guy named Dalomin. There
was a guy named Roman Kenny who was like
this—Totally psychotic wizard who played
in our guild. And I had lunch with these
guys, you know, we just went out
to Irvine to like a restaurant.
And, you know, forgive
me for the misuse of
the phrase, but it was like
my coming out moment. And
we talked about games having that
stigma and being embarrassed about
who you are and what you like. Like
I, up until that point, I would
never tell- Mm-hmm ...
friends, family, like, "I love
games. I'm playing this game EverQuest.
It's so cool, we just killed a
dragon." And so you were hiding
this part of your identity.
And I'm out to lunch with
these guys in Irvine,
and we're talking about dragons and swords
and, you know, raid tactics and talking
shit on all the people
in the guild. And I,
literally had this moment where
I felt like myself for the first
time. I just felt like so
comfortable, and that was an
eye-opening moment. And
after that, after that
lunch happened, he invited
me for a couple more lunches
down, you know, just... Uh, I just saw
it as like, "Oh, now, I'm..." You know,
I made friends with these people
online. Now, we know each other in real
life, and they happen to work for
this game company. And at another one
of the lunches, they invite this troll
warrior to have lunch with us, whose
name in the game was
Barfa, the Troll Warrior.
Mm-hmm. And Barfa, Barfa wasn't
somebody who played with
us all the time, but kind of
like Ariel got into the guild
kind of on the side. You know, it was
one of those like inside invites of
like, "Who's Barfa?" "I don't know,
but Barfa is in the guild now." And
there was at the time, it was a new
dungeon called The Hole, and we had never
done it before. And we jumped down in
this hole, and we're doing this whole
dungeon, and everything goes wrong,
as it's prone to do in EverQuest.
And the whole guild escapes
except for Barfa, whose
troll character's so big, he
can't jump out of the exit.
Mm-hmm. And I had this
potion that was like
a really expensive potion
that was a teleport potion
that, you know, no one but someone
in the uber guild could afford
at the time. And I hand
the potion to Barfa, and I
say, "Here, use this. It'll teleport
you out." And I'm a rogue, I can
just stealth and get out of the dungeon
on my own. So I saved Barfa, not really
knowing who Barfa was, and I
did it with a very expensive
potion. Mm-hmm. Having lunch, Rob introduced
me, "This is Allen Adham. He plays
Barfa." Mm-hmm. I'm like, "Oh,
Barfa!" And we, you know, he has a...
"You saved me in The Hole that
time." Well, it turns out Allen
was the founder of
Blizzard, and he was the
head... He was sort of the head of
everything at that time. It was
Allen, Mike Morhaime, and Frank Pearce.
And what I didn't realize what these
lunches were, like I just loved them
because I felt like I was myself. I felt
true happiness being surrounded
by these, you know, people who
were talkin' about video games and I felt
comfortable around. And one day, Rob
logs into EverQuest. He wasn't playing
much at the time, and he said, "I want
you tomorrow to check the
Blizzard job site." Mm-hmm.
I'm like, "Okay, like, I'll
check the Blizzard job
site." And they had announced World of
Warcraft, and posted on the job site- Mm-hmm
... was the job for an
associate quest designer.
And the funniest part of
it was, I forget if it was
a requirement or a plus in the
job description, but they're
like, "We really want somebody
with a creative writing
degree." Hmm. And I'm like, "You guys set
this up for me." Like, they
were just looking... And it was
that hindsight moment of like,
actually, these guys were just
interviewing me- Yeah ... for six
months. And they were actually friends,
and they were really cool about it too. And
I just had the fuck it moment like that,
that job opened up.
I applied with all my heart, you
know? Like, it, they had a bunch
of quest writing on it. And then I
went through like a pretty hardcore
six-month recruiting
process because they never
hired designers from out of
the company. Traditionally,
designers were promoted from
within Blizzard. Either they would
like transfer out of other
disciplines, or they would come
from quality assurance, tech support. So
hiring somebody off the street was kind of
a big deal for them, and
they really put me through a
grilling. Um, I met with... It was the first
time I met Chris Metzen- Mm-hmm ... who
is maybe the most inspirational,
creative person on
the planet. And you
instantly... They paired
me... They did this interview pairing.
There were these two guys. It was Kevin
Jordan- Mm-hmm ... who was one of
the original designers on WoW.
Really, he doesn't get enough credit for
his contributions. He was one of the
earliest class designers, PvP designers.
But he's a really quiet guy.
Mm-hmm. And they paired
him with Chris, and Chris just owns
the room, you know? Mm-hmm. Chris,
you could just sit and listen to
him. He's so creative. He's so
passionate. And the way he articulates
things, like you just instantly
become a fan of Chris when you're
around Chris. And Chris, Kevin, and I go
to lunch at, at this Italian
place that was across the street
from Blizzard, and I remember...Chris
made a stop to buy cigarettes
, you know, on the way to the interview.
And then every other word out of Chris's
mouth was like, "Fuck," and, "Shit."
And I'd come from this whole, like,
corporate culture from my dad's
recruiting business, where I'd never imagined
somebody would curse in an interview,
or stop to buy smokes. And again, it
was like, "I'm around my people."
Like, I never smoked, but just, you know,
being around people who didn't care about-
... what the corporate norms were was so
inspiring. And then my
last interview was with,
uh, Alan and Rob, and a
great programmer named
Bob Fitch. Like, I think he's one of the
first five developers at Blizzard. Uh,
and they took me to an ARCO station that
had a Jack in the Box. You know, how, like-
... sometimes they'll combo? It was like
ARCO Jack in the Box. And that was my
final interview at Blizzard,
was at the ARCO Jack in the
Box. And I remember thinking to myself,
"These guys just brought me to a Jack
in the Box that's in an ARCO station.
I need to work here." Like, this
is... "These are my people."
"This is where I belong." Like,
it was the greatest thing ever.
And so, yeah, that's my
crazy journey to Blizzard.
- Uh, started at the bottom and end up at
the top in a Jack in the Box. Can you
speak to... 'Cause you mentioned
some of the low points in the... in
depression. Through that journey,
how did you find your way
out? So, can you just...
A lot of people are
sitting in those low points right
now listening to this. What kind of
wisdom can you draw about finding
your way out, finding your people?
- There were a lot of really
low points. Uh, I'll give you
the weirdest one. I started drinking
a lot, and alcohol was something
that I really wrestled with
until my early 30s. And one
of the things I'm most proud of
today is sobriety and having
been sober for such a long time now. And
I remember I was- I was just ha- I would
like buy a bottle of Old Grand-Dad and-
... like, drink the whole thing
by myself, and then watch the
Oscars. I remember I was ... Of
all things, I'm watching the
Oscars, which is just such a
fake, bullshit environment.
But I was like... You know,
I was really drunk and
all those people seemed so
together and successful and
polished, and I just...
It made me... It was
that contrast that made me feel like
such a failure. And it all seems so
stupid and unimportant to me now. Um, I
became... You know, I got in that constant
struggle of try not to drink, but drink
to make it feel better. I was lucky,
My parents were very
supportive of me, even
in my 20s, even after I, you know, quote-unquote
left the house. I went into therapy
and that was very helpful. You know,
know, extremely helpful. And
one thing I learned is that you
have to find the right
therapist for you. It's not
just checking a checkbox of, "I
went to therapy." It's about
finding somebody who sort of
helps you get out of whatever rut you're
in, in a way that's healthy for you. And,
um, I tried antidepressants,
but I hated... I just hated
taking pills and feeling
like something was in
me, and making me feel different. I never
responded to it. And then the hardest
thing, you know, which
I've never mentioned to
anyone, and is hard for me to talk about,
but eventually I went through ECT,
which is electroconvulsive
therapy, shock therapy. And that
broke me out. And I would never endorse that
as a miracle. That was... I was at such
a low point that people were very
worried about me and my wellbeing-
... and what was gonna happen,
and that was sort of an
extreme pull-the-rip-cord, like
there's-nothing-else-to-lose moment.
And I think that was the difference
maker. That, and starting at Blizzard.
- To find... I mean, there is a- there
is a deep loneliness there when
before you met those guys at lunch, you're
alone, like in a really
deep fundamental way.
Like, in the way you weren't in New York
with the writing- with the writer's group,
right? And so that must've been an
incredible experience just to see the guild.
- Yes. It was everything I nee- I... As such
an introvert, you- you think that there
are extroverts and introverts,
and introverts don't need
anybody, but weirdly, I think
introverts almost need people more.
And we don't always know how to engage-
... in the right, healthy ways, and
how to find people and how to connect
with people. And it was- it was great. Um,
one... The thing that had attracted
me to creative writing was
the solitude of it, and the
fact that you didn't have to
collaborate, and you could just write
what you wanted to write and it
was all you. You would succeed
on your own or you would fail
on your own, and that was very
attractive to me. And the thought
of creative collaboration was actually
off-putting. I'd spent all four years
of undergrad interning at Universal
Pictures, 'cause I thought I wanted to be in
film, and it was such
an unhealthy creative
collaboration in the film
industry. It's a very,
you know, I look up unhealthily
to the film industry
and admire it and, you know, grew up
with all these legends who had come from
there. But it's like a caste system.
And I was on the bottom of the caste
system as an intern, and I was
seeing how the other people who were low
caste in the film industry were
treated, and it was just horrible,
you know. But games was different. Games
was very flat. It didn't matter if you
were the CEO or the boss, like,
the way Mike and Allen carried
themselves with, you know, me, who was an
associate game designer, you felt like an
equal. And I think it... Not just the
comradery, but the part that shouldn't be
overlooked is the work itself and the work
ethic. That's what really pulled me out.
- Hard work on a thing you love.
- Yeah.
- I have to, if you may allow
me, read the prophetic one of
us, quote, "one of us" post
you made on April 18th,
2002. Because in some
deep sense, you, I think,
remained one of us. The...
I apologize to bring
up Justinian the emperor, but
remained a kind of peasant
gamer, a true gamer, who
happens to be also be
designing the games. And so
this post kind of speaks
to that. It's fascinating to read,
because that was at the very
beginning, right? You didn't know
anything. You didn't know the
games you would end up creating.
Title of the post, "If you want
something done right."
He wrote, "This week, I
accepted a position as associate
game designer with Blizzard
Entertainment. Specifically, I will
be designing quests for World of
Warcraft, Blizzard's MMORPG
based on the popular
Warcraft series. In addition to my
duties as quest designer, I will
also be expected to contribute
to helping design the end
game content for World of Warcraft.
The reason I'm sharing this
information, besides the fact
that I have a masochistic love of
reading rants and flames about myself,
is because I know that the fans of
this site are hardcore
MMORPG players. The readers
of the site have also come to
know my personal opinions on
what constitutes a fun gaming
experience versus what feels like
a complete waste of time or poorly
designed encounter." Wow, you're
very eloquent in this post and
without too much shit talking.
"You've all read my opinions
on such things as tedious key
camps, obvious time sinks,
devoid of any story or linear
narrative, quests which reward
the lucky over the skilled and
quest rewards which are out of sync
with the amount of time and effort
required to complete them. I
hope that my association with
World of Warcraft will serve to
comfort MMORPG fans that one of us
is on the other side of the fence,
looking out for the interest of the
player." And you go on to describe some
of the high hopes you have for World of
Warcraft, which is really fun to
read because you don't realize-
- Now-
- ... it's gonna be, like, one of
the greatest games of all time
played by millions of human beings, just
where those millions of human beings are
playing for hundreds of hours, thousands
of hours. It's crazy. It's funny that
this... one of us is writing
at the dawn of a new
age. The final paragraph is, "So with all
that is going on with me,
you'll have to excuse any
lapse in updates to the site
here. I will try my hardest
to give you slack or something
to read while you should be
working. But in the meantime,
there's a whole world of
NPCs. They need to learn
the words kaksagur and
mo'fucker, in quotes,
and the like. Although
something tells me I'm
already in trouble with the
boss." One of us, Jeff,
one of us. That was
a beautiful, beautiful post. Did you
in fact get in trouble with the boss?
- No. No. My boss was Allen.
And Allen was very understanding
and he... they kind of knew
what they were getting into-
when they hired me. And that
post actually embarrasses me
when I hear it now.
There's so much ego in it-
... and I think that's...
it's got that 20 year old-
... you know, "I don't
know what I don't know."
- "I know exactly how to fix this
video game and all video games and-"
But there's brilliance behind that.
There's a passion behind that.
Like, we're... when you're a gamer
and you really put in the hours
in a game like EverQuest, you
understand what makes for a compelling
experience. You don't, at that time,
understand how much hard work is required
to create that experience and
how much uncertainty there is,
how difficult it is, how many
trade-offs there are. How your
designs, when they actually are brought to
the world and are experienced by thousands of
people, millions of people,
they are different from
the division you had for it. So all
those elements you don't know, but you
have to have that ego in
the beginning, right?
Do you even have the guts to try? Do you
have the guts to put in all that work? So
what were the... what was it
like? What were the vibes of
early Blizzard like? They've...
at this point, Warcraft
I and II, Warcraft III is in production.
StarCraft. These are legendary
games. I don't... I spent probably
over 1,000 hours in
these games combined. I
played Warcraft I, II, III.
I played StarCraft I and II.
I played WoW, of course.
Diablo I, II, III,
IV. Play Diablo II with "Stay a while
and listen," with Deckard Cain.
- Stay a while and listen.
- I mean, some of these characters, some of
these experiences just, they'll stay with me
forever. Anyway, so big thank you to those
early Blizzard folks.
What was it like? What
was the team like? What were the developers
like? What were the vibes like in those
early days?
- It was the dream. When I showed up at
Blizzard on my first day, the office
was on the University of
California Irvine campus
at the time. They have this research
and development park where,
if you're like a tech company,
you can get office space there,
and Blizzard took up...
When I joined, it was
three-fourths of the building was Blizzard,
and there were... There was like a
building right next to it that had
like Cisco and, you know, it was like
all kind of techy places. And it was
so funny because you drive up and like
everything was very serious and
corporate, and then outside of the
Blizzard offices, everybody
is wearing black T-shirts and
shorts and throwing frisbees
and playing Hacky Sack
and on scooters and skateboards,
and you're like, "Okay, that's
where, that's where Blizzard
is." So it was that
environment. I remember walking in
the door and thinking like, "It
feels like I'm walking into a dorm room-"
"... 'cause it was just posters
on the wall." And there were
actually, like people would have
futons because they'd be sleeping
because we would work so much back then.
But the vibe was... It was very small. Like
Blizzard, the day I joined in May of 2002,
was fewer than 200 people, and
that included... There was a
whole group up in San Mateo
called Blizzard North.
So Blizzard South, the Irvine
group, was responsible
for StarCraft and Warcraft, and there
were two development teams at
Blizzard. It was called Team
One and Team Two at Blizzard South. Um,
Team One was revered.
These are the RTS guys.
They made, you know,
StarCraft, Warcraft II, and
they were, at that time, they're
working on Warcraft III.
Team Two was kind of the
red-headed stepchild.
Like apparently, before I joined,
they had tried to spin off
a second team multiple times
and failed, and then they
finally decided they were
gonna make World of Warcraft.
There was a game called Nomad. I don't
know what that game was
exactly, but that was what Team
Two was working on at
first. That got scrapped,
and Allen stor- steered the team towards
World of Warcraft. And there's amazing
designer named Eric Dodds. He'd go on later
in his career to be the game director of
Hearthstone. Him and Ben,
Ben Brode basically were the
core designers behind that.
But Eric and Kevin Jordan
were these two key designers
working on World of Warcraft
for Team Two, and then you had this tech
group that was headed up by John Cash.
And John Cash, the first
day that I showed up
to work on Team Two, they said,
"You have to go get your login
from John Cash." I'm like,
"John... The John Cash from id?"
And, you, you know, John Cash
has a skin. You could be
John Cash in Quake III. So, and then he
saw me, and he, he was a huge EverQuest
player, and you're like... He was
like, "You're the guy who runs
Legacy of Steel." I'm like, "You're
John Cash." We had, we had that
moment where we kind of
fanboyed out on each other.
And it was just... The
vibe was so cool there.
Like, there were very few producers.
So a game team, there are
five core disciplines that
make a video game. You've got
engineers or programmers who
are writing the code. You've
got the art team that's making
all the visuals for the
game, and that spans everything
from like 3D modeling, characters,
environments, to also
animation, tech art, you
know, making it all work. You've got game
design, which some companies
don't have design. The
artists and the engineers
do it. Valve famously has
very few designers because
everybody there is a
designer. But in companies where design is
a discipline, which it very
much is so at Blizzard, game
designers are sort of the
creating the game experience
people, you know, setting up all
the systems and content in a
way that gets the player to
navigate through the game.
- So that's part of a story, part of this quest
design, part of it is like how you move
through the game world.
- Yes. So game designers, there's a
spectrum, like same with
art, same with engineering,
of roles within game design. Some are
more heavy on the systems side. So like
any game that you've played where loot
drops- Diablo IV, World
of Warcraft, you know,
Escape from Tarkov,
whatever. If there's loot
dropping, a designer has planned out very
carefully what drops where and at what
percentages. That would be
like a systems designer.
A content designer is
somebody who's gonna make
quests or write storylines,
or there might even
be a narrative designer, which is even more
focused on a story. But designers, you
know, run the gamut, and then you've
got these jack-of-all-trade designers
that can do it all.
Um, so that's the design group. There's
production, which is project management, and
production is different at every game
company you go to. So if you talk to someone
from EA or Blizzard, production might be
very different. They might be the
boss. They might actually be a
designer or they might be more of a project
manager. And then one of my favorite
disciplines on a game team that's
often overlooked is sound and-
... you know, audio, which is comprised
of the sound designers and composers.
And there are two things, I think there
are two things that no one realizes
how much they bring to a game until
they're missing, and that's audio and
lighting. Because most of the time, we're
playing without these things,
and it just feels a little
off and wrong. And when
you have a great lighting
artist or you have a
great composer or sound
designer, like, it... the experience.
You're just tapping into these
senses that you wouldn't otherwise. But
that's who comprises the game team.
- Is the lighting, you
know, all the different
kinds of graphics, would
that be under the art team?
- Yeah. Lighting, you're gonna have
lighting under the art team, but
they're gonna be best friends
with the graphics programmer.
And, you know, like I mentioned
with design, there's this wide
spectrum on the engineering team,
you have some guys who are like,
Architectural geniuses who are coming up
with, you know, the server client
model or the networking or
whatever. Others are more,
like, gameplay focus. On
Overwatch, we had an audio
programmer just doing nothing but
audio hooks for the audio team. And
on every game team, you're gonna
have graphics programmers who
will work with people like the
lighting artists or the environmental
artists, character artists on shaders, and
basically any way to make the game.
They'll always ask, "What's your vision?
What are you trying to get it to look like?"
They'll want an illustration of what should the
world look like, and they'll be the
ones who say, "I know how to write
code to- that will let
you do that." So you
partner a great graphics programmer
with a great lighting artist, and
that's... That's actually
the creative tension behind
games and what makes game
teams so unique, is if we were
to line them up on some crazy spectrum,
on one end, you're gonna have the artists
who... They're creative,
dare I say emotional-
... you know, they are
artistes on that end. And on
the other end, you have the
most logical, brilliant
programmers whose minds just work very
differently from the most creative art-
Like artists could be sitting, you have a meeting
with them and they'll just sit illustrating.
If there's any piece of paper,
they're drawing on it. Um,
and programmers, you know, they're just so
brilliant and organized in their
thinking and everything is so
logical. And then in the middle
are people like the sound
designers, the- the game designers,
and the producers. They're kind
of a little bit in- in
all those fields, but
it's the brilliance of
taking people who are so
vastly different in their
interests and talents, but
aiming them at that shared
goal or that shared vision of
the game that, like, really
makes something special.
- And there, I mean, you showed me the size of
the team for World of Warcraft, but you've
also are well known for working on
quite small teams to create these
incredibly huge games. What is
the- the power of a small team
in this kind of context where
a lot... there's that creative
tension? Is it- is it because
a small team avoids maybe the
compartmentalization, like
the modular where the
artists now have their own
wing building where they never
talk to the engineers, that kind of thing?
- Absolutely. I mean, you hit the nail
on the head. The bigger the team, the
more you become a cog in the machine.
And on a small team, the way I like to
describe it is you get to have a loud voice.
If we're a small team, let's
say we're gonna make a game
and it's at sort of the
incubation period of a game
and there's only 10 of us, all
10 of us are in the room for
every decision. You know, I'm
not a server networking guy, but
I'm in the room for that
discussion. I'm not an illustrator,
but I'm gonna sit in the room when
we decide what the art style looks
like. As soon as the team starts to
grow, we become compartmentalized.
It's exactly like you said. And
there's a weird thing that happens
that's just kind of a human nature
thing. The less you interact
with somebody, the more you
sort of become alienated from them
and vilify their point of view.
You tend to look at what they
do and say with skepticism
rather than trust and belief in them. And
I find on smaller teams where
we all know each other's names,
I know what everybody's working on
every day, they know what I'm working
on, everybody can talk to each
other, there's none of that
stereotyping of a discipline.
On big unhealthy teams, you start to
say things like, "Well, the artists
just don't get it."
"They don't understand what we're trying to
make." And when you back up and you think about
the statement that you just said,
it's like... Such an asshole
statement. Like, really, all
the artists don't get it? Like,
that's... A, that's not
true. B, that's sort of
demeaning to them. Like, they signed up
for the... This is their life's work, too.
This game is gonna be
as much theirs as it is
mine. So who am I to say
a statement like that?
- Yeah. It's harmful to a
discipline to think that you
understand the world.
Most silly other folks
don't, and you have nothing to
learn from them, really, and,
They're deluded in some in some
kind of way. That's so powerful.
- Fast-forwarding a little bit, when we
formed Team Four and... Which went on to
make Titan and ultimately fail,
and then that got rebooted
as the Overwatch team, the idea
that I tried to get through to the
team was to make an assumption. And really,
like, Blizzard is one of the top game
developers in the world, and
we were very fortunate when
I was there, and I imagine
it's this way today, that we
could recruit whatever talent
we wanted. It... The best of
the best wanted to come work at Blizzard.
And if you sort of go through
the paces of that and
say, "Okay, when we recruit
somebody..." Let's say
we're recruiting an artist to make
props. Boxes, chairs, whatever. That is
the best prop artist in the industry.
That's who's gonna show up on our
doorstep, so when they show up here, we
should treat them like the best prop
artist in the industry
instead of starting from a
place of doubt and cynicism. So, when that
person speaks up and says, "I think..."
Like, with Overwatch, for example, "I think
we should do this." You know, "We should
do X instead of Y." Instead of saying,
"Well, I'm a believer in
Y, why are you against my
idea X?" You should take a
moment, have a deep breath, and
say, "Man, the best prop
artist in the industry
is suggesting something.
Why don't I listen to it?"
- I actually do it for
myself, like this kinda
thought framework or thought
experiment. Whenever I'm
talking to a new person, especially if
I feel, myself, a little bit tinge of
that feeling. Usually, it happens with,
like, a really young person, like an
undergraduate student or someone like
this. I pretend that they are the smartest
person in the world in my head, and then
not... Like, it puts me in the mode of,
like, assuming I have
a lot to learn from them, and it
helps. You actually, like, really
listen. I literally think they're the
smartest, wisest human on Earth. It helps me.
- I had that, like, I think...
You know, I'm no expert.
I'm a game designer, so, like, as
much psychology as I know is how to
manipulate people into
having fun, hopefully.
Like, I don't know, I don't have an
important job. But psychologically speaking-
- That's fun.
- ... I... One thing I think a lot about is
ego, and I think about insecurity. And
insecurity, we all have. Like,
all of us as human beings
have insecurity. It just manifests
itself in different ways.
And as we kind of go through our
life journey, the insecurity also
changes. So, like, some people, for
example, use their insecurity to
rip other people apart. Some people
destroy themselves through their
own insecurity. Some people
destroy everybody with their
insecurity. But I had that moment as a young
lead, when I first was made a lead on,
like, World of Warcraft, where I felt
it was very important to be right
and to, you know, be shepherding the
correct idea. And I actually got pulled
aside. Like, Pardo and I had a meeting
with a couple people who weren't game
designers, and
it's always tricky as a game designer
because constantly everybody is throwing
ideas out in- on a game team.
Like, there's no shortage of ideas
ever. And we were in some
meeting about something,
and these people kind of
threw out these ideas. And I
wasn't mean to them, but I very kind of
systematically, like an insecure, you know,
ego-driven new lead would do, I kind
of, "Let me tell you why that's
wrong, and let me tell you what we're
gonna do instead." And after the
meeting, you know, Pardo pulled me
aside, and he said, "You're a very smart
designer, but you shouldn't do what you
just did to those people. You should always
listen to what people have to say and try
to make their ideas work." And I just...
Over and over, I was like, "Okay,
anytime an idea comes my way, let's try
to make it work." And it went from this
kind of thing that I didn't believe into
to actually, like, a core part of who I am
today as a leader, as a game designer,
as a game director. And some of the best
ideas have come from developing
other peoples' ideas-
... where your first reaction is like,
"No, that's wrong," and then just kind of
sticking with it and going, "But how could
we make it work?" And the most gratifying
part when it succeeds is
they get all the credit,
and you've sort of
elevated this person who
Whose idea wouldn't have
been championed, whose idea
by the insecure, egotistical lead of, you
know, early 2000s would have just said
no. Now their idea is the
thing everybody in World
of Warcraft or Overwatch is just
loving, and they get all the credit.
- I should give context to the listener who
doesn't know about the great Jeffrey Kaplan,
That you're one of the most humble
and always give credit to the team
for everything and anything. And so
everything we talk about
today, I know you're probably
resisting constantly giving
credit to the team on everything.
So you're the famous, "Hi, I'm Jeff from
the Overwatch team," right? So just as
a small aside, thank you
for your humility through
through your career, and thank you
for always celebrating the team. But
let's talk about WoW.
Let's talk about World of
Warcraft. Tell me what the early
days of developing WoW was
like. Maybe we should
talk about what World of
Warcraft, WoW is, going
to Perplexity here.
World of Warcraft is a massively
multiplayer online RPG where you create a
character, level it up doing quests
and dungeons, and progress your
gear and power in an open
fantasy world called
Azeroth. At a basic level, you
move, use abilities from your
action bar, follow quests,
and gradually learn a combat
rotation that fits your class.
And there's all kinds of
characters and roles and classes. You
pick a race, appearance, starting zone,
small racial bonuses. In a class,
how you fight, what your role is in
groups. Can you continue, fill in some
of the gaps, what is World of Warcraft?
- World of Warcraft, first of
all, more than anything,
is a world. Like, it's a
world that you can live in
with real other people, and
everybody's kinda living out their
fantasy. Chris Metzen, who was the creative
director on World of Warcraft, and
really, like, Allen Adham, who's one
of the founders of Blizzard, calls
Chris "the heart and soul of Blizzard."
And it's almost like when you're
making a Blizzard game, you're making
Chris' imagination at some point.
And Chris famously said,
"The lead character of World
of Warcraft is the world."
And I always believed
that. So you're trying to create
this place that's exciting and
dangerous, but comfortable, but uncomfortable
and gorgeous, and, you know, it
should feel massive, and it really is.
It, it's, you know, can take a half an hour
to get from one end of the world to the
other. But it's this world you're living
in. The world is divided into two warring
factions. There's the Horde
and the Alliance, and that
was a very important, very controversial
decision that was made by Allen
Adham, was the champion of
the Horde and Alliance.
- And that in the early days, there
was a really strong division.
- Strong division.
- Like... You pick a side and then you hang
around with only people of your kind.
- Yeah, and you get it tattooed in real life
on you. Like, the amount of people who
walk up to me and show
me their Horde tattoo.
- That's awesome.
- Like, it's epic. It's like
it's become who they are.
Like, if you were to say, like,
"Hey, Lex, come play World of
Warcraft with me. We're Alliance
on Tichondrius," you'd be like-
- Right
- ... "Dude-"
- Lose my number.
- "... Alliance?"
- Yeah.
- Like, "Okay, I don't think
we can be friends anymore."
But the Horde-Alliance decision
was really controversial because
in EverQuest, it was mixed race.
They had all the races kind of
like WoW did, but they could
all group with each other. And Pardo
and I came from EverQuest, where we
felt like this was a horrible
decision Allen was making.
And we argued, Allen, Rob, Bob,
Fitch, and I would have lunch every
single day, and we would just talk about
WoW and the core design of WoW. Rob
wasn't even on WoW at that time.
He was finishing Warcraft III. And we
would fight over the Horde-Alliance
split, if it was a good idea or not. And
Allen had... He came from
more of the Dark Age of
Camelot community, which
was another massive
multiplayer online game
that was more PvP based.
And he said the magic of that game
was they had three factions, and
he liked the fact that you were
instantly on a team. You weren't a
loner in the world. And whether
you liked it or not, you
had people on your side.
And Rob and I just
argued and argued against it, and then
sometime before beta, Allen retired.
He went on to run a hedge
fund, of all things.
Like, got super into poker, got super
into finance, left, and retires,
like, I think it was nine months to a
year before WoW shipped, which is kinda
nuts. And Rob takes over as lead designer
in Allen's stead, and to Rob's credit,
the first thing he did was
go... Speaking to what we were
speaking about earlier,
he said, "Allen's a smart
guy. The fact that he was
fighting so hard for-"
"... Horde Alliance, we gotta do it." And,
uh, Rob and I sort of
changed our point of view
and got on board with Horde
Alliance and went all in. And
so, you know, the early days of WoW was...
It was a great team. It was a mix of
these veterans that we all looked up to.
You know, we had Mark Kern running
the team. Shane Dabiri was, you
know, legendary Blizzard developer.
Bill Petris was the art director,
and then we had Metzen, who was
sort of like... Metzen was the cool big
brother we all, you know, aspired to be.
Uh, I'm older than Metzen, but I looked
up to him like a big brother. And
then there were a lot of us
who had never done it before,
or they had also pulled a
lot of people from other
teams and other game types. Like, for
example, the guys building the dungeons,
they hired out of the Quake community.
And because they didn't have
any hardcore MMO designer
on the staff at that time,
it was, you know, Kevin
and Eric and Alan were sort of the only
designers, they started
building Quake dungeons-
... as, like, Quake levels as
the dungeons. At one point, WoW
was even made in QERadiant,
which was the Quake engine.
And then they later, you know,
retooled to where they were using
a proprietary engine. So we were like
this hodgepodge, like the Bad News Bears-
... is how I would describe
the WoW team, of this mix of
veterans and then people
like me. Like, I'm
just some fucking idiot, you know-
... who played a lot of EverQuest.
And I end up at Blizzard.
- Designing quests.
- Yeah. Like, okay, we're gonna
design World of Warcraft now. And
I've said this later with
hindsight, I think a
huge part of WoW's success with, especially
with the early WoW team, Team Two in its
earliest formation, was that we didn't
know what we were doing.
You kind of... Like, it's
that... Titan was the
example for me. Titan was
the attempt at making an MMO after
World of Warcraft at Blizzard.
And we failed horribly, and we
had the best of the best on that
team. And it's because
everybody was too much of an
expert on how to make a
groundbreaking phenomenon MMO.
World of Warcraft was a
bunch of people, like a very
successful, sure of itself company
who had made StarCraft, Diablo
Warcraft, with a bunch of yayhoos basically-
... who was like, "Yeah, we can compete
with Sony Online." At the time, they
were making EverQuest II. Like, if we go
back in the time machine,
EverQuest II had been
announced. And EverQuest
fans, we were just
drooling for EverQuest II. It
wasn't, "Oh, cool, World of
Warcraft." It was EQ2 was gonna take, you
know, the chalice and run with it. And
then, of all things, they
announced Star Wars Galaxies,
and they had a brilliant designer on that,
a guy named Raph Koster, who had come
from that Ultima Online,
and he's just a really
smart game designer. If you ever watch
one of his lectures, like, he lectured a
lot at GDC, and, you know, we're like,
"Oh my God, they're making EverQuest
II and Star Wars Galaxies, and they have
the Star Wars intellectual property."
"We're fucked."
Like, "How are we gonna compete?" And
everybody had seen the success of EQ,
EverQuest, and everybody
was gonna make an MMO,
and it was just a question
of who was gonna win.
- So you're feeling this immense
pressure. You have this small team
of just this hodgepodge of this unlikely
team that kind of looks fast forwarding
to Overwatch, the heroes in Overwatch, but
working extremely hard. Now, you told me
about crazy, crazy work hours, and not
because you were forced to,
but because you wanted to,
because your heart was in it,
because you're like, "This is
everything." Like, you loved it.
- Yeah. The- the games industry has a
terrible reputation for insane amounts of
overtime. It's just called
crunch. Like do you crunch
or not? These days, crunch is not
allowed, not permitted, heavily frowned
upon. If we were to work overtime,
somebody'd write an article about
it next week and say how horrible we are
for working overtime. Um, back then,
we worked insane, and I
mean insane hours. The
longest shift I ever
worked straight was 30
hours. That's when we were gold mastering
Warcraft III. This was in my... I think,
um, War III shipped on July 3rd,
2002 so this would have been,
like, late June, early July. Probably late
June. And I had nothing
to do with War III.
I should just say that. Like,
in the credits, I'm additional-
additional help or additional
testing or something like that. Um,
when I showed up in May of 2002, it was all
hands on deck World of Warcraft for E3.
We got through E3, and then
all hands on deck, the
whole company, get War III out the door.
- For shipping Warcraft III.
- For shipping Warcraft III,
and because I had not been
involved with the game at
all, and I was a brand new
wet-behind-the-ears game designer,
they're like, "You're just gonna help
test whatever we tell you to test."
So we're trying to gold master,
and there's a crash that happens rarely.
If you run one of the cinematics, like you
have to be watching the
cinematic after one of the
levels, and then there was
a crash that happened. And
so a programmer put in
some logging to catch
it, and then they needed
somebody to just over and
over again, "I need the crash
to happen so I can fix the
bug." And I sat there for 30 hours and
just watched the cinematic for 30 hours-
... straight. And it was the funniest
thing, like it was almost surreal
watching everybody leave at
the... which was a trickle
out. Like, everybody kind
of trickles out, like, at-
... different hours, you know? The
family guys go much earlier than the
single guys. And then watching everybody
show up again in... the next morning,
and they're all, like, dressed
different, and they look all refreshed.
And I'm just like in the same position.
You know, like eyes are beet red.
- To the soundtrack of
the cinematic and yeah.
- Yeah. But we crunched World of Warcraft,
we crunched... The date slipped, so
you do this thing. I remember
Mark Kern standing the team up
and saying, "We're gonna
crunch early so we don't
have to crunch later in the project."
And I really believe he wasn't
manipulating us. Like, I
really genuinely believe
that he believed in that.
But with games anything
can happen, and they're
just... We slip uncontrollably all the
time. And we slipped, and it sort of
created just this death march endless death
march that... Like to this
day, members of the WoW team will
remember, like, Newport Rib.
If I say that, they'll have,
like, twitches because, like,
they would cater the dinner. They'd bring
it in at, like, 6:00 or 7:00 at night.
And they'd... Everybody
was eating Newport Rib
or Panda Express. It was like
the worst diet ever. I actually
like Newport Rib, no shade- ... on them.
But you can only eat so much of it.
And the carpets are stained and, like,
dudes are falling asleep on the couches.
And it was an unhealthy
work environment. It
gets pinned on... 'Cause at a lot
of places it is executive driven.
And it is mandated from the
top, but the hours that I
worked, I never blamed on anyone
but myself. I just wanted to.
I remember, you know,
coming in on Memorial
Day, like, with sand from the beach on my
feet because I really wanted to
get some work done that day, and
working through Christmas, and
those were things I wanted to
do. I never felt like somebody, you
know, held my feet to the coals.
- Yeah, it's such a complicated thing because
yeah, okay, you could say that's unhealthy,
but I know a large number of
people, especially in their 20s,
but actually throughout their career, that
have been at companies that do crunch
for a thing they believe in, for a thing they
love, and it's some of the most fulfilling
years of their life, months and
years of their life. And they
also it's not just fulfilling, they
grow from it, they learn
from it, and it... You know,
and when they... Especially when
they talk back about it, about that
time, they can see how incredible
it was. Of course, when
you're going through it, sometimes
it's extremely difficult, you
don't know. And then the crunch, like you
mentioned, it's supposed to be a month
or two, and then it turns out to be
a half a year, and then maybe it
turns out to be something like a Titan
type game where you never actually ship
it, and it's heartbreaking and the pain,
it's all... But then you look back
and you realize how
incredible that journey was.
- I think, like, my reflections on it
many years later, and having gone
through, like, pretty crazy levels
of crunch to more controlled, I
think where crunch is
problematic and people are
good to be vocal about being opposed
to it, is when it's forced and
unnecessary. There's a
lot of like, "Hey, if
anybody on the team stays, we all stay"-
- Yeah.
- ... kind of, which I think is not necessary.
I don't think executives who take
off and work 40-hour weeks should
be telling anybody to stay late.
I think that's wrong and immoral. But
to me as an individual, as long as I'm
not telling other people to do
it, my life's work is my passion
and I want to do it as
much as possible. I find
myself, I don't think I've
ever worked less than 10
hours in a day. Like that... 10 hours
is like a normal-ish day to me.
- Yeah. Yeah.
- And I enjoy lots of weekends working
because I enjoy it. It brings
me pleasure and fulfillment.
And all of that
said, from a place of caution,
especially in this era
when people are very touchy about it.
I don't try to impose that on anybody
else. I don't want anybody to
feel like they're obligated
to, but please understand
it's what makes me who
I am, that work ethic.
I enjoy it. I actually... Some of my fondest
memories are from those WoW crunches.
- And then looking back and reading some of these
stories, it's pretty cool because me, as a
fan, on the receiving end of
some of those video games, you
bring joy to millions of
people. It's awesome.
Let me ask you about quests, but first,
quick bathroom break if it's okay.
Quick 30-second thank you to our
sponsors. Check them out in the
description. It really is the best
way to support this podcast. Go to
lexfridman.com/sponsors. We got Fin for
customer service AI agents, Blitzy for
code generation in large code
bases, BetterHelp for mental
health, Shopify for selling stuff online,
CodeRabbit for AI-powered code review, and
Perplexity for curiosity-driven knowledge
exploration. Choose wisely,
my friends. And now,
back to my conversation with Jeff Kaplan.
Okay, we're back. So I think
it's fair to say that before
WoW, MMO leveling, like
in EverQuest, consisted
of, maybe that's simplifying it a bit, but
standing in one spot and killing monsters
for hours. You helped develop with
WoW, I would say a revolutionary
idea of quest-driven
leveling, where there's a
story-driven, quest-driven
guide through the world, and
it so happens that as part of doing that,
you're also leveling the character.
So the leveling is both
fun and is the engine that
drives the story that then
also immerses you into the
world and pulls you in more
and more and more and more. So
take me through this process of developing
that idea of quest-driven design.
- Sure. Yeah, there were actually a lot of
people involved in it, and they all kind of
contributed in their own unique ways.
Allen Adham was the lead designer on
WoW. When we first sort of
decided we were gonna have a
quest-based game, we used to joke that,
like, EverQuest barely had any quests in it.
It did have quests, they just...
They weren't really in front
of the player in an obvious way. You
kind of had to seek them out on a
website. And Allen knew that he
wanted quests to be a big part of,
of World of Warcraft. And so he
hired me. That was my entry level
position at Blizzard. And
on the same day, he hired
a guy named Pat Nagle, which
was hilarious to me, because
Pat was the... He had this funny title
of HR and Facilities at
Blizzard, because it was such a
small company. So, like, if
you sent an application in,
Pat would deal with the
application, or if the toilet
overflowed, Pat would
have to deal with it. And
so the whole time I was applying at Blizzard, I
was going through Pat, and then on my first day,
they put Pat and I in an office
together, and he's like,
"Yeah, they hired me also
as the quest designer." And
so Pat... And he was the most
wonderful guy. We had so much
fun. So Pat and I kind
of designed the quest
system. It was Allen's
idea to have it in the
first place. And then there was that
great designer I mentioned, Eric
Dodds, who helped a lot with the
interface of it all. And the idea was at
first, we actually on a
whiteboard in Allen's
office, we estimated how many
quests we thought EverQuest
had to date. And EverQuest had
had, you know, I think four
or three expansions at that point in time,
and we're like, "Wow, we have to make
all of these quests like EverQuest
has." It's gonna be a lot of quests,
and it's kind of up to me and Pat to do
it all. And we believed all we had to
do was match that EverQuest number. And
Pat and I started working on, like, the
design of the system and how it would
interact, and Eric Dodds was really
involved in how the interface... You know,
like how you were going to interact
with the NPCs and all of that.
And we split up the world into like two
zones. He was gonna take
Elwynn Forest, which was the
starting area for the humans, and I
was gonna take Westfall, which was
the sophomore zone after Elwynn for the
humans. Pat and I would meet with Chris
Metzen, and those were the funnest
meetings ever because Chris just
has stories in his head and
visions. Chris is, like,
artist, storyteller, world
builder extraordinaire, and
he sort of described what
he wanted going on in those
zones. You know, you want
the gameplay to follow the
flow of what was going on with the stories
of those areas. So we finished Elwynn and
Westfall, and we did, like,
a team play test. And our
assumption was because the way EverQuest
worked, players just wanted to level
up. It was a level based game.
You go out. You kill a creature.
You get experience points.
You level up a little bit. And so
the way people played EverQuest is
they'd find these areas where
there were lots of creatures,
and you'd usually find the best experience
efficiency cycle you could
find, so, like, fast
respawn kind of easy things to kill, and
that's how you would progress through
EverQuest. And I remember
Alan kind of telling
us, like, "Hey, the
quests... When Pat and Jeff
write quests, they'll aim
us to where the creatures
are." You'll do a quest, and
then you'll spend a few hours
killing creatures in that area afterwards,
and that's how he imagined it would work.
So we kind of set up the world that
way. You know, Pat probably did
a dozen, maybe 20 quests
in Elwynn. I'd do a dozen,
20 quests in Westfall, and
we'd do this team play
test. And we had a bunch of
people on the team who never
played MMOs, like guys with
shooter background, you know,
StarCraft fans, et cetera.
And they'd play World of
Warcraft. I think we played for, like,
an hour or two, and we only did Elwynn
Forest. And the overwhelming
feedback from our team...
And these are people who really
didn't play EverQuest, they're
like, "My God, Pat, that was horrible.
I ran out of quests, like, right
away." And we're like, "Wait a second.
You expect to just have quests just keep
going?" And they're like,
"Yeah, we expect to have
quests just keep going the
whole way. And we kinda had
an oh shit moment right after that
Elwynn Forest play test, where we
realized, like, we had vastly underestimated
the number of quests we were gonna
need. And we changed, we
developed this philosophy
that's kind of a shared philosophy
across Blizzard games in
general at this point. And I've heard it
outside of Blizzard, other people in the
industry, which is you design along
the path of least resistance.
So basically what that means, like, in
EverQuest, the path of least
resistance if you wanted your
character to hit max level is to
find the easiest creatures and
kill them over and over again
in place, which to some
people think is very boring. To me, I would
do that for eight hours 'cause I think that's
fun. But we decided in World of
Warcraft, we said, why don't
we make the path of least
resistance, so in this
case, the way to get the
best experience the fastest not to be
killing creatures in one
place, but will overload the
experience into the quests themselves,
and then that will move you through the
world, which will get you to
see everything. It will enable
us to tell these awesome
storylines. It sort of did a
lot for the game, and I think
it was like a fundamental
change in the genre. Like,
if you look at the things
that... EverQuest was
very popular and very
successful, and it was hitting
like hundreds of thousands of
players. And WoW blew the
doors open and was tens of
millions of players. And
I think the fundamental
difference there was that WoW allowed
you to play as a single player.
And what makes an MMO, massively
multiplayer online game,
massive is having the other people there.
And they're so important or else
the world feels kind of wrong and
dead. But the concept that
we have to force you to
interact with them to do anything is very
off-putting to a lot of people.
And the fact that people could
come into WoW and just kind of the
game design, the game design way of
describing it is directed gameplay.
And some games have extremely tight
directed gameplay. Like,
for example, if you were to
play a single player game
like Last of Us, you
know, you'll have those moments where they'll
be like, you'll come up to a log and then
press Triangle to duck or else,
or whatever the duck button is—
... left stick to duck to go under.
And that's like the ultimate
in directed gameplay. Like, they're
telling you exactly what to
do. On the other end of the spectrum
is a game like Minecraft, like
vanilla Minecraft, where
you'll find it's very
divisive amongst gamers
who love Minecraft or hate
it. The ones who hate it are like,
"I don't know what I'm supposed to
do." Like, "You drop me in this
world. I'm supposed to dig or
something." And that's the type of player
that needs directed gameplay
or they're gonna cycle
out. Not all players need it. And what
WoW did, that it doesn't seem like
an innovation, it doesn't seem
like revolutionary, but it sort of
created this directed gameplay that felt
optional, but really wasn't.
- I mean, I think it's
absolutely revolutionary. It
basically changed gaming.
It changed the way we
see games. And it was
so successful in part
because it became a mechanism by which you
could spend hundreds of hours, thousands
of hours in the game. I
mean, it's kind of a, like,
obviously... It's one of those... All
these great ideas are always like this,
right? In retrospect, you're like,
"Well, obviously if you make the path of
least resistance quest-driven
gameplay, then it's
gonna be the reason that most people
play." But it is true that... I'm with
you on... I both like the
quests and cow level.
I guess you have to design for everybody.
That's the tricky thing. Like, how do you
fine-tune this? If you think
of it as a loop of like accept
quest, kill 10 rats, turn in quest, ding,
level up, that loop. Like, how do you
fine-tune that so it's maximum fun
or fun for the maximum number of people?
Is it... How- how difficult is that?
- It's extremely difficult.
And not everybody's good
at doing that. We all, to some
degree, lack the self-awareness
of how we tick. So we're
all different types of
gamers, but if you ask me to
describe the type of gamer I
am, I might actually be giving
more of a picture of the type of
gamer I wish I was or the
type of gamer I want you
to think I am versus the
type of gamer I actually am.
By playing lots of games, you cannot
be an exceptional game designer
without playing the shit
out of as much as you
can and understanding on a deep level.
And the weirdest part about it is
you're not just looking for the
greatest hits. You learn just as
much from a shitty game that you do
from an amazing game. And also—like, a
lousy game can have a great system that
was tuned wrong, or lacked the correct
interface, or they didn't put
the right visceral polish on
it. There's an executional aspect to
all of it. When I'm playing,
I'm not only, like, thinking
about what makes this fun, I'm
thinking about what makes this
not fun. But I'm also watching everyone
around me. My wife plays games, my kids
play games. And understanding,
like, well, what do
they do and how are they different to
me? Why are they finding enjoyment in
this? Why are they not? What's
frustrating? What did they miss?
- And being raw honest with exactly
what you're saying. I mean,
I, if I were to analyze the
kind of gamer I am, why do I
enjoy cow level? And why, above that,
why do I enjoy loot? Why- why is
loot so fun? Like, what-
what does- what is it about
opening a chest and getting a
bunch of stuff? I mean, I, that
might be like at the core of what
I enjoy about gaming. That, and
walking around a beautiful
world with nice music.
- As a game designer, I am, at best,
a quack psychologist. You know?
We can motivate you to
do some weird things.
The two driving motivators
are extrinsic and
intrinsic. And all of us,
at different times in
our lives, in our gaming
careers, whatever, we can
shift from being intrinsically
motivated to being
extrinsically motivated.
Obviously, loot is a
big extrinsic motivation,
but even saying that is
too simplistic. Like, for example, on
the loot boxes of Overwatch, there's
a masterfully designed system that was
designed by a game designer, not by a
businessperson or whatever. Like, not
a commercial person. But beyond that,
we also had a really
good team who said the
visceral opening of the
box, the sound it makes-
... the graphics, like the way things
spill out and animate, all of that is as
satisfying as well. And you're trying
to... Like, there's the lizard
brain part of it. Of like,
how does it... Like, I see
chest. I know I'm gonna... It's gonna
feel good. It's gonna feel good.
And then there's the spreadsheety
part of it. Of, what does it
have? Is it an upgrade? And I think
great game designers know how to
tap into both of those things.
You know, tap into the intrinsic and
extrinsic. There's...
Like, when I was studying
writing, you would study
the elements of fiction.
And, you know, these are just
like basic things like plot and
character development and
setting and theme and
whatever. And there's
no, like, textbook that
exists for game design, at least
none that has been introduced to me
yet. But I think about,
like, elements of fun.
What are the things that create fun
for players? And they're not the
same. Like, it really... Every human being
is different. Like, progression is fun.
Sense of progression that I'm
investing. I'm putting an
investment into this game,
and then the game is
recognizing my investment. That
things like leveling, things like the
amount of gold you have,
those are all investment
based. There's mastery. There's
just pure raw skill. Creativity is
one. And hand-in-hand with creativity is
customization. And some of
those can be aesthetic.
Like, look at my customized
character, and I have the black
curly hair, and I put an earring in my
character and I'm customizing
in that way. The other is
customizing my build.
I'm gonna come up with a
whirlwind barbarian and I'm the first
to do it. These are all elements of fun
that designers can tap into,
and in fact are frequently
tapping into. But they're never defined
anywhere, and I find that
players drift. Like, I'm the
type of player who's not really
loot motivated. I'm more
motivated by seeing the content the world
has to offer. And often that takes me on a
detour of being loot
motivated, because there
might be a dragon or a demon somewhere that
I can't beat without this level of armor
and sword. So now I'm loot
motivated for some period
of time, to get back to being content
motivated. Or if I'm having trouble
defeating a boss, I might
have to go back and look
at the skills and abilities that
my character's using, and I have
to go into creativity mode.
"Oh, he has that one AE where
he..." Area of effect. "...where
he puts a curse on me."
And, you know, "If I had this
counterability to the curse, I
could beat the boss to get the loot, to get
to the next boss." These are all cycles
that are tapping into all those
different elements of fun.
- And ultimately enjoying and
discovering what the world gives you.
Has to offer to you. And
you're... You have a lot of hats
as a gamer, so you love the RPG, MMORPG
world, but you're also a big shooter guy.
Can you explain to me what fun
in a shooter context is? And
we'll talk about Overwatch as a
specific kind of fun. Maybe...
But you're also a huge fan of the
ultra-realistic shooters. Call of
Duty. What is the definition of fun there?
- There's a lot of skill
and mastery. Off the
cuff, flippant comment would
be clicking heads, you
know? I'm just trying to click heads.
- Okay.
- There's an intimacy also to the first
person camera. And now,
not all shooters are first
person. There is a large trend these days
to third person. I really think PUBG and
Fortnite sort of opened
that third person shooter
door. And you're seeing games like ARC
Raiders are third person. But to me,
nothing is as pure as
first person. Like you're
... literally living in the world
as that being. You can look
at your hands, and it's that pure
visceral test of skill of, "Can you click
on the thing fast enough?" And when it's
PvP-based, you know that's coming at you.
- Could you lay out for people who
don't necessarily know what PvP and
PvE is? And single player
- Absolutely
- ... multiplayer, massively
online multiplayer?
- So PvP is player versus
player, so that means a
combative, you know... If Lex
and I are up against each
other, we're attacking each other. We
call that PvP. You can get killed by
another player. Uh, player versus
environment is anytime you're shooting
computer controlled
opponents. So if it's a game
about dragons, the dragon is
the E, the environment in PvE.
- And we should say that PvP and
PvE, the P might be multiple
players. It could be five
versus five, six versus
six for PvP. And for PvE, it could be,
like, raids where it's multiple people,
large groups of people
going against the AI.
- Yep. So single player,
that's a game that you
play totally by yourself. Like, you
don't play with anybody else. You
can't play with anybody
else. It's not networked to
play with other people. For example,
I'm playing a game called Story of
Seasons right now on the
Switch, which I just
play by myself. I have my farm.
You know, there's a town. I'm
meeting people in the town, and
no one can come and join me and
interact with that. So
it's a very controlled
experience. Single player games are very
difficult, or they can be
very difficult and expensive
in terms of production to
create. Like, if you think of a
game, like Uncharted or Last of Us
that's made by Naughty Dog,
like, those are kind of the
preeminent best single
player games you could talk
about. They're very handcrafted.
Every experience is made just for
you. One up from that is what
I call co-op. And these terms
become interchangeable, so I'm
using some semantics here.
But co-op is any cooperative
experience that we
can play together, but
we're sharing an exact
same experience very
intentionally. And it's
me sharing that experience
only with other people that I
know. So a great example of a cooperative
game, maybe one of the best
of all times, was Left 4
Dead, which is a game
where you and three other
people go in and you fight,
like, hordes of zombies,
and you try to progress
through to the end safe room.
it's a very cooperative
experience. A game like
Diablo IV, you can play cooperatively
with other people. Now, one up from that
is multiplayer, and that's
when you're engaging with
strangers who are in the same
world that you might not have the
same cooperative goals as. You might have
very opposed goals to them. You might PvP
them, or they might just be
random strangers that you
pass in a town or city and never see again.
And then massively multiplayer, which
is what the MMO online sort of stands
for, massively multiplayer
online game, that's when you're
breaking into thousands
of players. And the
worlds become really,
really big at that point.
- By the way, we should say
that the co-op could be
remote connection, but
there's also what would you
call it, couch co-op where you
have two people. Some games are
really designed well for the experience of two
humans sitting together and playing the game
together.
Which is a really tricky thing to design
for, but if it's done well, it's a,
It's a really fulfilling
experience. Like, with a
friend, with a loved one, you can,
like, play a game together. And Diablo
IV, I should say, is an example of a
game that does that really well. They do
couch co-op. Like, two people
can play Diablo sitting together
and there's a real intimate
experience in that.
- Yeah, couch co- it's funny, 'cause it
actually, like, predates the couch even.
Some of those old arcade games-
... like, would have two joysticks
on them and then you could play-
... with somebody else. Or there's
you know, famous game Gauntlet-
... had four joysticks and four
people playing together. And
then anybody who grew up
in that early console era,
like, you know, NES, Sega Genesis was a
legendary one. We would sit and we'd play
NHL 93- ... on the couch. And anybody
who lost, you'd lose the controller.
And you could play that with up to
four people playing, or we... I
remember one of the big games
that came out was Mortal
Kombat. And we would play
Mortal Kombat on the Sega
Genesis, and it was the house
rules were, you know, whoever
lost, so whether you were in your
college dorm or just some buddy's
apartment and there's five
people there, you're constantly
cycling everybody in and
out. But there's just a
magic to multiplayer, of engaging
and sharing in the experience-
... with other people. Um, that's why I've
always... I've never made a single
player game. Uh, I have great admiration
for them. I don't know if I
could do it. The challenge...
The reason I love multiplayer
so much, the way I
describe being a game
director or game designer on
a multiplayer game, it's like
imagine if you were gonna
be a movie director, and you were gonna
have all these actors and set designers and
props and, you know, writers
and scripts and all of
this stuff, and your goal
was to get a certain movie
made. But we're gonna ask you, the director,
to just... You're gonna leave the room.
You can set it all up ahead of time, and
then you're not allowed to be there
or talk to anybody involved in it.
And now you need the actors to
have an experience, and it's
just kind of the wildest,
funnest experiment. Like-
- From a designer/creator perspective, 'cause
you don't know what the players will
create, so that's fun to see. You
lay out the chessboard, you lay
out the world, and then you get to watch
what they create together. That's true.
- I struggle because sometimes people
call me the anti-story guy in
games, and that really hurts me
because, like, I actually love story in
games, and I counter that
I'm the anti-shitty story
guy. And what I mean by
that is like, A, the most
magical stories that I've ever heard come
out of video games are player stories
about, you know, the time
I gave Barfa a potion
and then I met him in real life. Like,
that's better than any video game writing
that I've heard in a long while. The
player story is so much more interesting.
You know? "Lex, why do you
like the cow level so much?"
"Tell me about some goofy time-"
"... like a loot goblin drew
you into the most danger."
"And... But there was another player
there, and then..." You know, like,
those are the stories that I
think are more interesting from
games. There are some exceptional writers
in video games and some exceptional games
at story. You know, I've
mentioned Naughty Dog,
like they're kind of on
another level. But Valve has
amazing writing. The writing behind Half-Life
2, Marc Laidlaw, the writing behind
Portal-
... and Portal 2. I think it was Erik
Wolpaw, who is hilarious, just amazing,
and Rockstar. Red Dead Redemption
2 is one of my favorite
games of all time, and that's a game where
you can see the expertise and mastery
of the game design and the
narrative design, and the fact
that you can have those player stories of
just the goofy shit. Like,
I remember... 'Cause the
controls are a little
awkward in Red Dead for a PC
player who's playing on console.
Like, I always get confused
about, like, taking out my
gun and putting it away, and
what's, you know, the
L1 and L2. Like, as a
PC gamer, I'm just like, "Let me
bind this stuff to where I want
it." And so like you know,
a guy in town rides by and
he's like, "Howdy, partner." And I
go to, like, give him the Arthur
Morgan, you know, "Hey, what's
up?" back, and I just whip out my
sawed-off shotgun and, like, blow his
fucking head off. And then the whole
town is like... Suddenly
I'm, like, under... I'm
wanted and I'm being chased,
and then there's a train that,
like, takes out the posse, and-
- Yes.
- It's like those stories, and the fact
that Red Dead can have, you know, this,
like, touching, heartbreaking
story of Arthur Morgan and his
journey, but you can also have, you
know, the player story of blowing
off the poor guy that's just trying to-
- And that's the combination.
And then Rockstar does a really good job
with you know, even in Grand Theft Auto with
the radio, it can be kind of a side aspect
to the game, that great writing there can
create- help create the world-
... with, with humor, with color, with
depth, with heartbreak, all that kind of
stuff.
- There was a moment in Red Dead where
it... There's the Daniel Lanois song-
..."That's the Way It Is".
I just... I love Daniel
Lanois, so the fact that somehow Rockstar
landed him and like, was able to
get that song out of him. And
there's this moment where you're, like,
riding back and they start that song, and-
- Yeah.
- Everything up to then had been
gorgeous, like, more of a
score. There's Woody Jackson,
who's, like, a really amazing game
composer. He had done the
score for that, and so
nothing had been, like, lyrical
with words. And then they play
the Daniel Lanois song, and there's,
like, the quotes are coming back-
... from, like, Dutch
and Arthur Morgan, and
I'm just like, "Goddam,
this is, like... This is
art." You know, this is like I know it's
supposed to be entertainment, I know it's a
business, but the top of the pyramid is
art, and- ... it just hit me emotionally.
- Yeah, there's certain games where, you
know... I mean, that moment, you just
imagine the number of people who shed
a tear during that moment, and that's
just a reflection of how much you're
invested into this world, into
these characters, and it's
a beautiful thing. Uh,
I have to ask you about this image
that you sent me. It's super cool, so
I'd love it if we could nerd out about
it a little bit, the zone flow for
the original World of Warcraft.
There's a bunch of zones. It'd
be awesome if you kinda talk
through how, like, this world is
built. Take me to that time when you
were designing this, before anyone
else got a chance to play it.
- All WoW stuff. It would start from that
inspiration of Chris and the world.
And, you know, it was so
fun hanging out with Chris
because we had whiteboards
all over the place, and, you
know, "Hey, Chris, we should
make Eastern Kingdoms.
What do you think it should be?"
And he would just tell you the
story of each of these as he's
just drawing. And Chris is
a really talented artist, so
the map would be gorgeous. I
have lots of, like,
photographs of Chris maps,
That he would just kind of
whiteboard up. He's like, you know,
"Here's the Dwarven Lands,
there's Wetlands with Khaz Modan
up there, and that's where this,
you know, tribe of dwarves
were from. And then they, you
know, humans are going to be down,
With Elwynn Forest. And then
Westfall, there's, you know,
this group called the Defias Brotherhood
and they have a place called
Deadmines." So I would talk to Chris
because you want to capture
the spirit, like, as a game
designer, you want to capture
the experience that's in
people's heads. So, like, take
Burning Steppes, for example.
Supposed to be one of the
scariest places with lava and
dragons and, you know, all
this kind of stuff. That
doesn't feel like where you want to
start. It feels like where you want to
end, so you kind of work the world
flow in a way that puts that at the
end. But there was also
kind of some magic to the
original starting areas, where we gave the
dwarves and the humans a free flight path
between... The dwarf hometown
was called Ironforge, the
human hometown was called Stormwind.
And we allowed you to fly for
free. So, like, these little
newbies who were, you know, level five or
something, if you played a dwarf
and I played a human, I'm like,
"Oh, Lex, don't worry, I'll come. You
know, I'll come to Ironforge and we'll
hook up and I'll just fly out to
you," which is the magic of World of
Warcraft. You have to fly
over Burning Steppes and
Searing Gorge, and you look
down and you're like, "Holy
shit, that looks scary and dangerous." And
it plants that seed of things to come.
- Uh, so you've designed some
incredible quests. Is there any that
stand out that you're proud of
ashamed of? I mean, you are
famously have designed the Green
Hills of Stranglethorn quest.
One of the most infamous
quests in the history of WoW,
of gaming, where you had to
collect a bunch of pages, or...
Green Hills of Stranglethorn,
maybe, can you,
comment on that one or any quest
that just springs to mind?
- Green Hills of Stranglethorn
holds a lot of emotional
value for me because
amongst WoW players back in
the day, it was unanimously hated as one of
the shittiest, most annoying quests. Um,
but it holds a really special
place in my heart. First of
all, it's one of the few times
that I just, like, wrote a
short story that's actually in the
game. Um, it's me paying homage to
Hemingway, and the guy who gives
you the quest, his name is
Hemet Nesingwary, which is just me
rearranging the letters of Hemingway.
There's another quest giver
there that's Kerouac's
name also mixed up. Um, and then
it was the typical hubris of
a junior game designer who thinks he's
clever but is actually a dipshit. That's-
That's the Green Hills of
Stranglethorn, like, summed up.
So, like, I wrote the story
over, like, it was, I think,
winter break, like, everybody
was gone and I just was so
happy to be in the office, you
know, I'm at Blizzard by myself
writing late at night. And
the whole idea, and this
is, this is very much what I call ant farm
designer, which is bad. Which
is, you know, you're the
game designer who's playing
God, and players are the ants
in your ant farm, and you want to
see what they're gonna do, which is
not the correct way to be a good multiplayer
designer. But I hadn't learned that
yet, and there's a, there's a
really great famous Sid Meier quote
where he says there's three
types of fun. Fun for the
player, fun for the
designer, and fun for the
computer. And we catch
ourselves, we're like, you know,
we gotta be really care... It has to
be fun for the player, not fun for
us. So this Green Hills of
Stranglethorn quest was like
an ant farm design of,
I'm gonna write this,
honestly, probably pretty shitty
story, I haven't read it since
2003 so God only knows
if it's any good. But I
wrote the story and then I divided
it up into all of these different
pages. And the quest
giver, Hemet Nesingwary,
wants you to put together, like, the
story's like, he wrote this book,
but then the pages got scattered
across Stranglethorn Vale.
And some... When you're doing quest
design, you're really thinking
about the player flow and you're
directing them from quest giver hubs
out until these destinations, and you
want them to do all the destinations.
But sometimes we would
do these bridging quests
where you could do anything in
the zone and it sort of had this
overlap. And so the pages of Green Hills of
Stranglethorn could be looted off of any
creature anywhere in Stranglethorn
Vale, and it was kind of
like that McDonald's Monopoly game
where you have to have all the
pieces or else you're not gonna
win. But where I really went
south, I don't think the
idea in a vacuum is horrible, but where
this really fell apart was the interface
of World of Warcraft wasn't
set up. Like the pages
didn't stack, there wasn't
a dedicated container to
put all the pages in, so
players had very limited bag
space. And as they're fighting in
Stranglethorn Vale, I'm just shitting up their
inventory with all of these
pag- And they only needed so
many. Like you might get
unlucky and you have like three
page fives that are just junk in your
inventory, and I might have like eight page
sixes. And then everybody...
And this was the goal, like
the designer trying to
puppeteer everybody. Everybody
in Stranglethorn chat is like,
"Hey, I'm looking for a page
six. Anyone got a page three?"
And that was like my fantasy as a
designer of like, and then
they're gonna be social and
meet each other, and players are
gonna be appreciative for each
other, but really all everybody did was
just no... Eventually, no one did the
quest. They just were super annoyed,
or they went to the Auction House.
auction house. So the quest is famous
in that it was so aggravating and
annoying and it just became a
way... It not only became a
way for me to learn from my
mistakes, but because I was
very open with the fact
that I didn't think it was good
and that the quest had failed, it
opened the door for us at
Blizzard to be critical of
our own work. Like it's always easier
if you're the first one to go out
and say, "Hey, guys, I think I made
one of the shittiest quests in the
game and here's why." Um, and then
it sort of challenged people to make
better versions of it.
- I mean, again, you continue to speak
with so much humility. But WoW
turned out to be one of the
biggest games of all time
both in terms of popularity,
how many players play it,
revenue, and critical acclaim. And then
you rose to become a game director of WoW
helping release Wrath of the
Lich King, which by many is
considered to be the greatest expansion.
I mean, there's a million questions I can
ask here, but maybe this is
also a good place to ask about
the famous Blizzard polish.
So Blizzard as a company
has historically, and you
were certainly a big part of
that, delivered these games. They were
just, uh, got so many pieces right and
well-functioning and
well-coordinated, and just feel
finished in a way that a lot of
other games don't get right. So what
does it take to take this
gigantic game, this game
played by millions of people,
loved by millions of people,
And deliver it in a way where
it's like it all just works?
- To have a level of polish is like a studio
wide culture that has to be instilled in
everybody, like no one can be satisfied
with a bug. Every game is gonna have bugs,
and Blizzard games have
bugs. It's a question
of, how quickly do you fix
them and with what urgency?
And as players ourselves, if we're
playing as much as anybody
else, we're gonna be motivated
to fix the bugs. There are some really
tactical aspects to it, too. The quality
assurance department at Blizzard is the
best in the industry.
Like the people who come
and do QA at Blizzard, they are passionate
gamers. Many of them want to be
developers themselves, and they're
not just doing it for a job. They do it
because they fucking love the game. And the
relationship we tried to
develop between us on the
development teams and QA was extremely
tight. And whenever possible,
we also tried to sit
as many QA members up with
the development team as
as possible, depending on the logistics
of... You know, in the early days,
we didn't always have the space
for all of QA to sit with us. We
were very fortunate on the Overwatch
team to have a large
amount of QA sitting with
us, and then developing that
relationship. You know, in
the early days there, there were
these fears of like, "Well, QA can't
talk to the developers,"
and trying to shatter that-
... of, because some of our QA members
knew the game so inside out, you
would just say to them like, "Hey,
dude. Just message me.
Here's my home number. Like,
call me if there's a bug. If you think we're
gonna get raked over the coals on this,
you gotta speak up. I don't care what
the chain of command is. Like, we gotta
fix this thing." So QA was amazing.
- I mean, so can you speak to
QA, quality assurance? At
the peak of the craft, what does
it entail? Like you're basically
experiencing the game and
trying to figure out,
particular slices of that
experience that could be improved?
- Yeah. People simplify
the role by just, "Oh,
these guys just get to play games all day
and then, like, let us know if there's a
bug." They are so
systematic in the way they
test stuff. They come up
with these plans that are
actually amazing of, like,
who's gonna test what.
There's a lot of regression
testing that goes on.
within QA there will also be
compatibility testing. The
Blizzard compatibility
department was amazing.
Like, they had every card,
every machine, every
configuration, and they would roll through
to make sure there wasn't some quirk that
was gonna come up on some video card
or some motherboard that
you weren't expecting. But
it was all very systematic.
It wasn't just Wild
West, let's play the game.
And then as a developer
interacting with QA, you would
find that there were certain
specialists whether like, for example, on
Overwatch, there were a
couple of players that...
Like, we all were shooter players when
we were making Overwatch, but I'm
not like esports level shooter player.
I'm like, you know, Gen Xer, "Remember
Doom, how good I was"-
- Yeah, right. Yeah, yeah.
- ... type of shooter player. But we
had, you know, a couple of these QA
specialists who, like,
they could just snipe from 100
meters out and hit the shot every
time and tell us if there
was a frame of input
delay, you know? And then
you sit that person with an
engineer and say, "Hey, I think
there's some input lag here."
- That's amazing.
- And sure enough, they'd be right. But
you have to have that relationship
where the devs trust QA. Or just even
on, like World of Warcraft, they had a
great relationship with QA in
that they built out a full raid
team to do the raids. And then you're
not only, like, looking for bugs, like, "Hey,
the dragon was supposed to fly and instead
it just, like, sunk through the world
and the game crashed," which would
happen. But, like, if you really value
QA, you're asking them, "What
do you... Dude, what do you
think? You're..." You know? Like,
"10 million people are gonna see
this. Your opinion, multiply it, you
know? It matters. What do you think? You know?
Are you having fun? Oh, yeah, this is cool.
This isn't cool." Um, so QA was important.
The other thing that was important
is the Blizzard engineering,
which you have to architect
your game to be hotfixable.
And what a hotfix is, games, there's a
couple ways to fix 'em. The way most
of us know, 'cause all the software we
have gets a patch, you know? You have to
update it. You have to download a new
version of it. Windows, you know,
you get that annoying message, like,
"There's a new version of Windows." And it
takes, you know, a few minutes and you
update it. You know, obviously, we
patch our games and that's where
we fix a lot of bugs, but if you
really wanna run a game like
Overwatch or World of Warcraft
successfully, you need master level
engineers who have architected
the client and server
in such a way that you can hotfix
the game on a dime. And what a
hotfix is, is a server patch that
no one's client has to go down for.
- Mm-hmm. That's 'cause you're dealing with a
huge number of players and you discover an
issue and you want to respond
to that issue really quickly.
- Yeah. There's emergency
issues like something's
crashing. Like, the worst
case scenario is anytime the
server's crashing. Or in
Overwatch, like, a really
catastrophic bug would be something
where you have to disable a
hero. Like, someone found an
exploit and you have to disable a
hero from the lineup. You want
to turn around that hotfix
if you can in a half an hour,
get that hero back live. You
might have somebody who only
plays that hero, and the only
reason they're gonna play Overwatch
is because that hero's active. You
don't want to wait for patches and you
want to hotfix- ... as fast as you can.
- And then also to improve the game quickly
to just even settle stuff to do that.
- Yeah. Players feel it.
Like, they... That's where
there's this idea of, like, the love and
the craftsmanship of the developer that
you can feel. Like, any, any product, you
know your iPhone or Android or, like, any
computer or consumer product, you can feel
when there are people who
loved it behind it and
aren't just putting it out on a
shelf. And games have that as
well, where you can feel the,
like, heart and soul of the the
developer in, in the
thing. And some of that's,
like, the joy and delight of, like,
that there's a cow level, right? That
that's... You know, you can feel the
humanity of the development team-
... through that. But
another part of that is,
like, do they clean up their
fucking yard, you know? Does this
game work? Is it... And it's
not just the bugs and the
crashes. It's, like, when
balance gets wacky and
stupid and, you know, suddenly
everybody's a barbarian and
whirlwinding and no one else will
play anything else. You're like, "We
should probably fix that," you know?
- Oh, those were the days. I sadly
was the barbarian whirlwind guy.
- One-handed.
- It was... Yeah, it
brought so much joy. So a
lot of people modern day think of
you as Jeff from the Overwatch team.
- My name is Jeff from the Overwatch
team. I'm Jeff from the Overwatch
team. I'm Jeff from the Overwatch team.
- But y'all must have forgot, you
were the game director of WoW
in an era when WoW was
one of the biggest games
in the world. Just, you
know, looking back,
what wisdom can you draw
from that time when
you got to experience
this era of gaming that
changed gaming forever, where it's millions
of people playing this video game?
- It was my first game I worked on, and
I joined it as this entry level dude.
I still have my offer letter from
Blizzard, which was for 35K a year.
You know, that's what I was making.
And, um... Very shortly after
WoW shipped, you know, Allen left his
lead before the beta, or
like right around the
beta, and then Rob took over as the lead
designer, and then he left the team very
shortly after WoW shipped
to go start StarCraft
II. And he put myself and Tom Chilton
in charge. Uh, Tom is a designer
who... He was a great partner of mine and
a great leader and he, he actually came
from Ultima Online. And so
I always looked up to Tom
because he had a lot more experience
than I did. And this is like early 2005,
the world was on fire, the
servers were barely running-
... WoW was just, had taken off like
gangbusters, and they basically put me
and Tom in charge of WoW. And at the
time they promoted me, my title...
I didn't even have a lead title,
my title was Senior Game Designer. And
Tom and I were running the
design of WoW at that time. So
I thought it was totally normal, and I
thought what we were
experiencing with WoW was just
normal for making a video game
because it was the first video game
that I had worked on. Mm-hmm. Um, I
thought it was the funnest joyride
because we were working on WoW,
we were still working insane
hours- and then I'd get home,
eat dinner, and then me and my
wife would log in and play WoW,
you know, for four hours, and then I'd
go in the next day and I'd work...
And it was just this... My
whole life was World of Warcraft. And I
loved it. Like I loved everything
from, you know, the creative
meetings with Chris Metzen and
just what an inspiration and
muse he was, down to the
simplest, dumbest design
stuff that like we as game
designers, like, you wanna
talk about why a button is in the lower-left
versus lower-right and what does that
mean? That's like two hours
of discussion. And is there a
better way? Like the 10,000
minutiae problems- were
thrilling to me. And then
also the big disasters.
Like the big... I had in the early days
of WoW, we didn't really have all the
processes in place for, like, how to
deal with being a successful
online game, and I literally
had GMs, like game masters,
these are customer support
guys, calling my home phone
at 3:00 in the morning.
Like, I remember this
one time there was some
faction token in Stranglethorn Vale and
they figured out a way to
exploit it, and this GM
calls me panicked, it's 3:00
in the morning. He's like,
"I'm just spawning..." Uh,
what, what did we call 'em? Uh,
Guardians of Blizzard. They were these
giant infernals that we just made that
instantly death touched anything.
We used to have them when we
were in the beta, like often the distance
of places players weren't supposed to
get in case they cheated their
way there. And this GM is just
spawning them all over
Stranglethorn Vale because
he's worried because the players
are exploiting. It's like 3:00
in the morning and I'm talking in hushed
tones because my wife is sleeping right
next to the bed. I'm doing this 'cause
it was actually like before the cell
phone days when I actually had
a landline. But that's just
how... And I loved it.
I loved the thrill of
those big moments, the
minutiae. And I felt
like through the running
WoW Live, which was
me and Tom together with an
amazing team, we kind of learned
how to be the WoW team. And putting
WoW in a box and shipping it was like
only chapter one in a 12-chapter book
essentially. And that first how to run the
game, how to patch it, what type
of content, how to deal with
emergencies, what should
our customer support be
like. I mean, we would debate
should we have a launcher or
not. You know, in the early days, the
only reason the launcher existed in
WoW was to run anti-cheat on your machine.
And we had a moment where we figured
out how to put that
into the game and out of the launcher.
And it was the first time I ever
really had an in-depth conversation with Mike
Morhaime. He's like, "You gotta bring the
launcher back, guys." We're like, "Why?"
He's like, "There's no better way
for us to talk to our players." And I
remember trying to hide the launcher.
And to this day, Mike was right.
Like, that launcher turned out to be
the best thing we ever had.
That's essentially what
Battle.net has morphed into
these days. But all those
decisions and when it
came time to make Burning
Crusade, you know, at that
point, Tom and I were leads. We
were full, they had actually promoted
us. There was, there were two
big exoduses of groups that quit
Blizzard, they were disenfranchised
if you can believe it. Like
we just shipped World of
Warcraft and this whole group just
walked out the door. I was actually
sitting, my, my desk faced Morhaime's
office, and I watched them all go in
and quit, and they were the group
that formed Carbine....
which made the game
WildStar. Ended up taking them 10 years to
make, and they were just
really unhappy with World of
Warcraft, and they were unhappy with,
um... I don't know what they were
unhappy with. They were unhappy
enough to walk out the door
right after we had shipped WoW.
- That's incredible. Like, what is it? Just because
they put their heart and soul into the game and
they maybe get exhausted
in a certain kind of way?
- Yeah, and I don't want to... It's not fair
of me to speak on their behalf. I think
they were promised some compensation
that they didn't immediately
see. I don't know if the game... Like,
here's the weird part when you make a game.
When you come up with
the idea and you start
pitching it to people, that's the
best the game is ever gonna be,
and then you work on it. Like,
you know, games I worked on
take five years, you know? Overwatch was
two and a half, three years. Every day you
get close to ship, the
imagination of the ideal game
gets farther and farther from
the reality, and you're always
shipping this, like,
greatly sacrificed thing
that nowhere near matches the imagination-
... of the inception of the idea, so you
become disenfranchised with the concept.
- So in some sense, you're shipping...
You're constantly in a state
of disappointment. You're
basically shipping
a lesser thing than you've
been dreaming about.
- Yes.
- You're doing less and less and less, saying
no and no, and cutting, and all that kind of
stuff. Yeah, it's difficult, psychologically
difficult, but nevertheless, the result when you
zoom out, it's one of the greatest games
of all time that millions of people
played for thousands of hours.
It's just... What... Did
it... Did you ever have an
experience, a realization how
huge WoW was in terms of not, like,
statistics on the server and so on,
but the cultural impact it had?
- The first time was the first
BlizzCon, which was in
2005. So when WoW shipped and this
is so weird to tell people, but
on the team not everyone, but a lot
of us were very demoralized after
WoW shipped. There were, there were
all sorts of issues with the servers
because the game did way more successful
than we expected it to
do and the server load
was just nuts. Like, we were
just... We were doing our best to
hire database programmers, you
know, 'cause we just didn't
know how to deal with the sheer scope of
the game. But when you're an individual
like... And at that time, like I
mentioned, there were multiple exoduses of
people who quit Blizzard.
They went and formed a
couple notable studios. One was Carbine
the other was Red 5. And we lost, like,
kind of our core people.
Like, when Red 5 started,
that was our team leader, that was
Mark Kern and our art director,
Bill Petras, they quit. When Carbine
started, it was, I think all of
our animators and some of our
best programmers and... Like,
it's really demoralizing when you
lose team members like
that, but then we were also
underwater. Like, the
servers aren't running,
We're not able to keep up with demand,
and we had to start putting patches
out, and now we're making patches
like... For a while we
had one animator who
stuck around, and then eventually
he left also, but you're doing
like, okay, we gotta now do a patch without
an animator. A lot of our art team was
gone at that point, and you're
trying to keep the ship afloat
and the morale was just in
the shitter. Like, everybody
felt very down on Team Two, the
WoW team was called Team Two, and that we
had somehow failed. And during that time,
there was this idea to do BlizzCon,
and the way that started was
EverQuest had done these, like, meetups
because they knew it was, like, a big
guild social game, and people would
get together at like some hotel
ballroom and you'd sit with your
guild at like a banquet room table.
And to give credit where credit's due,
I remember sitting in the meeting
for what was to become
BlizzCon, it was Pardo who
said, "Blizzard's bigger
than that. We're not just
one game, and I know everybody's
focused on World of Warcraft
right now, we should do BlizzCon."
And at the time, we had a game
called StarCraft Ghost was in
development, and that was getting
ready to show, and there was
Frozen Throne, which was the
expansion to Warcraft III, but,
like, we knew we were gonna make
StarCraft II. And then there was
a lot of motion happening with
Blizzard North, which is a whole
separate story, but there was like,
hey, we could really do a cool show-
... that's this BlizzCon
thing. And at first,
we kind of announced it and it just was
crickets. You know when you're, like,
excited about something, you're like,
"Man, everybody's gonna love. Like, we're
doing BlizzCon," and everybody's
kinda like, "Crickets. What's
BlizzCon? Who cares?" And we're
idiots, we're reading the forums, and
the forums are just flaming us all the
time, like, "There's lag
on this server and can't
log into that server." And that's,
that was our perspective of what was
happening. And then,
like I said, give Mike
Morhaime credit where credit's
due. He kept us committed to that
launcher, and they put the BlizzCon
tickets on the launcher, which
they hadn't done before. It was on the
website. And so everybody who logged
into World of Warcraft suddenly
got this like, "Hey, we're
doing BlizzCon in Anaheim, do you
wanna come?" Sold out instant. Like,
instantly sold out. And when I showed
up at that show, it... One of the
most emotional things in my life. It
was nothing but an outpouring of love.
And up until that point, your
perception was, because you're
just reading online and it was... The
perception is such hatred, because
people who are passionate
online, they express
themselves in the harshest ways
'cause it gets attention. You know,
that's the lesson I should've
learned from my early days.
And it's such an unfortunate thing, because
then you met these people in person
and they loved World of Warcraft.
And all they wanted to do was talk
about World of Warcraft and hear about
what was coming next and be around other
people who loved World of Warcraft, and-
- It's incredible. It's a fascinating theme,
to me, about human nature, and it's
absolutely true, and I wish there was a
thing that could be solved. But then again,
maybe not. Maybe that's
just the way it is. But in
person, all of the people that are
passionate about a particular topic,
and whatever that topic is, it could be
games it could be at conferences, technical
conferences, they're all mostly full of
love. And just the way they talk
about stuff, they nerd out.
Even the disagreements
are drenched in this,
Respect and appreciation and
love for the game, for the
game, for the topic. And online,
you're right, I don't know if
it's because of popularity
or clicks or so on, but
it's just the way of speaking on
the internet is more mockery and-
- Cynical.
- If you say, "I love this thing. Here's
an apple. I love apples," or, "I love
bananas. I love fr..." Like, "I love
X," whatever. You just get made fun of.
You get... And so the lesson
you learn from that is,
"Well, I'm just not going
to speak up when I love
something. I'm going to
instead speak up when
I, maybe how much I hate another
thing that's similar to it."
Or maybe join in when we're
making fun of a particular quirky
thing, about, "Don't you hate
it when bananas are too ripe or
too..." Versus like not
saying the, calling out the
elephant in the room is, "We're all gathered
here today 'cause we love the thing."
It's interesting. It's that aspect of the
internet that I think is jarring to a lot of
people depending on the game, but if
you go to Discord or Reddit or so on,
in the communities that love a
particular video game, there's a... If
you're not used to it,
and I don't often go, so when I
go it's like, "Wow, there's a lot
of, like, pretty intense kinda
mockery and derision and so
on." But you get used to it pretty quick and you
understand it. I just, I wish there was more
love.
- I feel bad because I played a role in
the earliest development of some of
that online culture. It really was social
media before it was called social media.
You know, I ran a... Uh,
I actually, I had this
reputation for being
edgier than I really was.
Um, there were a couple
notable posts that survived
30 years that people like to look back
on but they don't look back on the ones
where I'm just being chill. And that's
unfortunate. I think a lot
as a game designer about the
design of social media. And unfortunately,
social media in general is
designed in such a way where
the maximum hyperbole works,
and that's how you get the most
points is by being max hyperbolic.
And usually, unfortunately,
it's more in the
negative direction than the
positive direction. You know, if
I say, "That's a pretty
nice mug. I've seen nicer,
but I like this one,"
no one's interested in
that. I have to either love this thing, or
better, this thing's a
crime against humanity-
... in some way. And it's
very self- reinforcing
and everybody sort of feeds into it and-
- Especially when you're young. I got to see
this kinda interesting thing. So I was
at I, I spent, that's what we're
talking about, you're from Pasadena, so
I've been spending a
lot of time in Caltech
and working on robots, and we get to see
students come in from high school. Uh,
undergraduates come in and,
like a tour, hang out with the
robots. And middle school also.
And the interesting thing
you see, the younger that they are,
the more prevalent this effect, which
is all of them are kind of
afraid to show that they think a
thing is awesome. They're all... You could
just feel they're checking, "Is it okay?"
So they're, they're kind of
like the default mode is
whatever, this, everything is
stupid, this is stupid. You
know, that, 'cause that's
the safe place to be. It's
a real act of vulnerability. I would say
it's an act of courage, especially for a
young person, to be like, "Holy
shit, that's awesome." Like, I'm
gonna, if I think this is awesome, I'm gonna
be the nerd, I'm gonna take the risk and
be made fun of for saying,
"I love this," in that case,
it's, "I love this robot."
So that's a actual
psychological effect that also young
people are dealing with, in-person
also. So I think, I just
wanna say, for young
people listening to
this, be vulnerable, be
courageous and say you love a thing
if you love a thing. And do more
of that on the internet, I
think. Um, I think people
make up the internet, people build the
internet, and young people, more than
anybody else, define the
future of the internet. So
put more love out there in the world.
If you love a video game, if you love
Overwatch, say you love it.
- I couldn't agree more. You know,
as somebody who's taken a lot of
heat online, like any game
developer, you just get
destroyed. Doing what you do,
you must get destroyed, you
know? And it doesn't matter,
you get 100 compliments,
it's the one, you know,
you're... And you're
supposed to read it and supposed to be
fine with it and have it not affect you.
It'll stay with you for years,
you know? I have those. And I
think of it, like the cheesy, the
cheesy way I think about it is
like, is there some kind of social
Darwinism going on? And my big worry is
that there are creators... Like, now
being a creator of anything, writer,
musician, you know, make online
videos, whatever- whatever
creator means to you, make games. Now
part of the skillset is being able to
weather like a fire hose of criticism
like the world has never seen. And
I make up these scenarios in my
head of like, would van Gogh have
existed if, you know, Reddit and
all these things were out there
commenting on... Like, how many
people were able to communicate with
Beethoven in his lifetime, or in a
week? Like, how many influences could
comment on his music directly to him?
Versus like if I want to
insult Brad Pitt right now,
I can just go on 10 different
devices and do it. And it's like
that level of access is very dangerous,
and I worry that there is a whole group of
people who's receding
from us that will never
see the brilliance, and
they're being shut out
by the negativity. There's a very
real example, was Jay Wilson, who I
think is one of the great design minds,
who was the game director of Diablo
III. And he took so much heat,
it just affected him to the
point where he essentially
retired from making games.
Went and, you know, wrote
novels. I was very happy for him
because, you know, I'm glad he
found his place, and I think
he's getting back into
making games now. But we lost, we
essentially... Like, think how
many people loved Diablo III
and played the shit out of Diablo III.
And Jay is one of the people
you have to thank for that. And
yet that community basically
removed him from making
games for like 10, 15 years,
and it feels criminal to me.
- Yeah, absolutely. They... So
this is a call to action,
again. People out there,
support, especially young
creators, support them.
They need it. Like you
think negativity has no
cost, but it does. You're
robbing the world of some of
the great creations. And also,
allow creators to suck and to
improve. Because that's what the
process of creation is
like, is to take risks. To
and take risks meaning being
vulnerable, being cringe.
To doing the thing that like,
the embarrassing failure
where you're standing there on, you
know, in a in a silly clown
outfit, on stage, dancing, and
nobody, and nobody's laughing.
And it's a, it's... Comedians
go through this all the time, when... They
talk about this all the time, when they bomb,
right? They, the act just
doesn't work, and you have to go
through that. And you have to,
you have to support the creators
through that journey. In order to have
great things, we need to support those
folks. So, after shipping
WoW, Wrath of the
Lich King, again, many consider
it to be one of the great
expansions for WoW, you stepped
down as WoW's game director and
switched to developing Titan. This epic
huge game that promised to be
the, sort of the MMO to end
all MMOs. Um, I mean, it's kind of a
legendary vision for a game, right? It's
gigantic. With a lot of, like you said,
a brilliant team, a team that's now
hardened and knows how to do a great game.
But it was canceled after seven years in
development. So, tell me, what was the
vision of the game and what happened?
- Sure. So, as we were experiencing
success with World of Warcraft,
there was this concept in
the studio that WoW wasn't
gonna last forever.
WoW would be maybe successful for
five years, and eventually kind of
age out.And the studio would be real, in
real trouble if we didn't
have another massively
multiplayer online game sort of
waiting in the wings. So starting
around, I wanna say 2006, maybe 2005,
um, the talk of starting a team
really picked up momentum, and we
were working on Burning Crusade.
Uh, Rob Pardo took the
helm to start sort of
Titan development. We didn't even really
have a team then. And I remember,
being like embroiled in
Burning Crusade and going to
Titan meetings, and Rob pulled
a group, you know, from
kind of across the company, and
we started talking about what
this next MMO could be and
when it would get going. And
eventually, it started
in earnest, like real
development, around 2007.
The first team members
joined, and it was a real
ambitious project, including like
building a new engine from
scratch. I think maybe the
first team member was a guy named
John LaFleur, who was just a
stellar game programmer, and the engine,
which ultimately failed for
Titan ended up becoming
the engine for Overwatch, which
is a great success story for
him. And the idea behind the
game, it was gonna take place
in future Earth, and the players
played as secret agents.
And by day, they all had day jobs,
and by night, they went off and did cool
secret agent stuff. And the secret agent
stuff was very first-person shooter,
but over-the-top abilities,
Like you would see in Overwatch,
because that's where they came from.
And the by day stuff, we were
gonna let you run businesses.
We took a lot of influence from games
like Animal Crossing, Harvest Moon, the
Sims. We had a brilliant game designer
and game director named Matt Brown, who
was the creative director
on the Sims. He came
over. And so we had this vision that
there was gonna be all this like daytime
business house stuff. You could build a
house. You could live
in a neighborhood. Um,
and beyond that, there
was also a vision on the
technical side, game design
and technical side, that
unlike World of Warcraft,
which the modern day term for
it is that it's sharded.
Mm-hmm. So meaning people
play on different realms
or servers. In a WoW
server, I don't, I haven't been
on that team in a very long
time, but back in the day, you
might have 5,000 people on a WoW
server before they'd have
to spin up another WoW
server. The big idea behind Titan is that
everybody would play on one
server. It was a one server,
one world game, and the world was massive.
It was gonna take place in future Earth,
and we were literally building like,
we had what we called Bay City,
which was San Francisco. We had, you know,
Hollywood, and then we had
to build all of California
between that, and we also wanted
to build like Cairo and London.
And there's this realization of
like, how do we connect all of
these? The game had driving in it,
like full-blown, like GTA-style
driving. It was such a
gargantuan, huge undertaking
with a brand new engine, a
brand new team, a brand new IP,
intellectual property, you
know, setting, which we
really wrestled over. Like,
the amount that the IP
just, you know, trying to figure
out, like, are there aliens or
not aliens, you know? Like,
all that sounds kinda dumb and
fun, but when you're building
a game, like you, especially
world-building, you have to have
rules. That's- that's what makes
world-building work, is that like,
this exists in this world, and this
doesn't, and you know, why?
It's like, 'cause someone said
so, and just the way it
needs to be. But that
development started in 2007, kind of as
ideation, brainstorming,
early work. Really got
going in late 2007, and then I had
to ship Wrath of the Lich King,
And it was... We had the like, we
always did like a champagne toast. Uh,
I still remember it because it was
Election Day. I think it was like
Election Day and my birthday,
and the day Obama got
elected, and then I left
the WoW team on that
day. It was like memorable
in all those ways. And then
I joined the Titan team, and that game,
we went on, like the fast-forward
part of that is we shut it
down in 2013. That was one of the most
painful development processes that I've
ever been a part of, and probably,
probably deep into 2009, I knew that the
game in its current form could never
ship and would never exist, and
by 2010—Like after numerous
times trying to convince
the powers that be that,
like this game is not gonna
happen, it's in trouble.
I remember going to Mike Morhaime in
2010, and, like, you're going to the CEO
of... You know, at that time,
Blizzard was big company, and I'm
like, "You gotta shut us down.
We're just gonna burn money."
- What was your intuition about why? So
like from my understanding, there was
a few issues. So one, with such a
gigantic world, which by the way, is
a beautiful dream, this kind of universe
simulator, because I love... Every game you
mentioned there is great. I
empathize with the dream. I would
love to play that game. But
one of the issues, as I
understand, was that it was
unclear what, like, the
quest flow is. Like what are
you supposed to really do
in this game? What's the thing that
connects all of the pieces together?
- So it was a multifaceted failure
for- for many reasons. Ultimately,
the failure of Titan lies with leadership,
team leadership, myself
included. Like, there's just
no getting around that. And then on top
of that, like, a lot of games you
can point to as being like an
engineering failure, like the, you
know, the servers didn't work-
... or like an art failure, like no one
responded to the look of the game, or a design
failure, like the... it's just not fun
or it's tuned poorly. We failed on art,
engineering, and design,
and I'm cautious about
calling out art because some
of the best art ever made at
Blizzard was made for Titan. My criticism
isn't of the art that was created. My
criticism is that we never
had any art cohesion,
so the art looked like it could've
come from 10 different games.
- Mm-hmm. And we should say it cost $83
million across those years. So a large team
doing a lot of stuff, but not converging
towards a game that could actually ship.
- Correct. As, like, a game
designer, I use semantics a
lot and I like to define my semantics
so people know where I'm coming
from. Talking about ideas versus
vision for a second, ideas
are easy. Ideas, you know, I can have 10
in 10 seconds. You know, let's make a 2D
platformer about a mouse, you know,
whatever. Like, you can... A secret agent
by day is, you know, doing all
this cool shooting stuff, by night
is running a flower shop.
You know, ideas are
just infinite. At least on
creative teams, you know, you
have no shortage of ideas. What I call
vision is the ability to not only
take a great idea, but shepherd it into
existence, and you're doing that through
inspiration first and foremost.
If you need a team to make
it, you need a team to
believe in the vision of the
idea. And then there also has
to be a technological plan
for the idea. There has to be a design
plan. There has to be an art style for the
plan. There has to be a pragmatic
production reality to the plan. And Titan
kind of was like that was the hubris of
Blizzard in that era at its height of,
you know, we were over being
hurt about, you know, World of
Warcraft. I don't know if people are
gonna like it. And we were now in the
era of, like, we made World
of Warcraft. We can do no
wrong. This next thing is gonna be the
best ever. And there was also a lot
of what I call anticipatory hiring-
... or, like, there's opportunity
hiring and then there's also
anticipatory hiring. I
have the exact opposite
hiring philosophy. I won't hire anybody on
any team until, like, we're
feeling like we gotta work
overtime or, like, we might not
ship if we don't get, you know,
somebody else in here. And Titan kinda
had that hubris of like, well, we're
gonna build a really big world.
We don't know the story of the
world yet. We don't really have
it mapped out what it should be
like. We don't have the art
style really defined. We don't
know technically how we're gonna make
the art or what the constraints of it
are, but we know we're gonna build
a really big world, so let's
just start hiring
environmental artists. And,
like, in one year, we would hire, like, 70
environmental artists from all over
the world. You know, we're getting
visas and, like, the top tier talent
'cause at the height of World of
Warcraft and nobody knew the team that
they were coming on.
It was Blizzard's next
MMO top secret and they, you know,
their first day at work, like
some, you know, poor guy
from Belgium just shows
up and he's at his first day at
work and he's like, "Oh, are we
making World of StarCraft? Is that..." And they're
like, "No, dude. Let me show you it." And he's
like, "What is this game?"
You know? We were in that
world, and we hired way too many people.
The right way to incubate a video game
is you have the smallest group possible
and you try to get the idea across with
whatever technology you can
get your hands on, using other
engines, using art from
whatever. You prove out that
idea, and once you know what you're
doing, then you expand the team.
You know the cliche of idle hands
is the devil's work, or whatever.
You have this, like, brilliant team,
huge, and we don't have a road map
for what we're making or how
we're gonna make it. And
now you're having to deal with all
these people. Like, they're coming into
your office, you know, you're trying
to figure out what is the quest flow,
what—how do I design the quest system
for Titan, how can we prototype
it? And we're like, "Oh, this prop artist
over here is running out of stuff
to do. What props should he make?
Should he work on Chinatown or the
Hollywood set?" And you're
just making up busy work.
The engine didn't work. When we
would run play tests on Titan,
we would have to tell the team, "Stop
checking in because it slows us
down." We had this really great technical
artist, a guy named Dylan Jones,
and he was on Titan with us,
and I remember in, like, the
last days, we asked him,
because he was a very active
user Titan editor was called Titan Edit
or TED which is, to this day, TED is the
proprietary tool for Overwatch, since
Overwatch came from the Titan engine-
... which was Tank. And we
said to Dylan, "I want you
to log your uptime in the editor,
in TED." And in a 40-hour
week, he was only able
to work for 20 hours.
And you can imagine, you're building
a team of the best and the like, the
best in the industry, and they can't work.
So not only are you just burning cash
faster than anybody on the
planet, it's also, like,
imagine having fighter pilots,
but we don't let them fly.
Like, the creative frustration and the
way that that manifested itself, and
how demoralized the team
got, it was a disaster.
- And so many elements of
that were done completely
differently for Overwatch, which turned
out to be this incredibly
masterful execution on a short
timescale with a small team with a clear
vision. I read that sort of if
you- if you were to compare
Overwatch and Titan, sort of
the defining characteristic
for the Titan team, they said yes to
everything, and the Overwatch team said no to
everything. Meaning focus, like deep,
deep focus on the execution of a
very clear vision. And
maybe that's the process of
designing games, like you said, is, you
know on a team that's full of incredible
ideas because it's creative minds, it's
constantly saying no. It's a really
painful process, but perhaps it is the
responsibility of leadership
to just keep saying no. Which
sucks. I guess it sucks to be a
leader on a team in that sense,
because you're constantly saying no.
- The being a creative leader, you're in two
modes. You're pushing or you're
pulling, and whatever mode you're in
is the exact opposite of the team.
When they're not thinking outside the
box enough or, like, elevating the
vision enough, that's when you're
pushing them. Like, "Come on guys," you
know, "don't worry about the
schedule. We got—" you know, "capture
hearts and minds, inspire
people." And when they're going a
little crazy and they... Endless source of
great ideas and really
fun development, that's
when you gotta pull and say, "Guys,
we need to ship this. The best
feature we can add for the
player is shipping." That was a
common phrase that we had.
- So when Titan was canceled,
I mean that must've been a
gigantic heartbreak for everybody.
And there was this moment when
the plan was for the Titan
team to be disbanded and moved
elsewhere, but you fought for
for keeping some part of the
Titan team, the core of the team
together, and Mike Morhaime gave you six
weeks to come up with a pitch for a
new game. And you've talked about this
process, and you've mentioned that there
were three possible ideas, directions
you were thinking about. A StarCraft MMO
maybe an MMO in a new IP called
CrossWorlds, and then the third idea was
Overwatch. Can you take me
through those six weeks?
- Yeah, the six weeks, it's... It
was supposed to be the greatest
time ever if you think about it. Because
you're a game developer at Blizzard,
and you get to come up with a new idea.
So that sounds awesome, like, to
everybody at Blizzard, to all
game developers, it sounds
great. But we were probably the
most demoralized we'd ever been in
our careers. At least I was, you
know? I didn't know if I was gonna be fired.
I didn't know if that was the end of my
career at that point. And so it was
like a really serious, kind of dire
environment that this
was happening in. And
we were given two criteria that we had to
hit for these pitches. The first one was
that we had to ship within two years. And
that is a very ambitious timeframe for
any game.
- Yeah, crazy. That's crazy.
- But for a Blizzard game,
it's kind of insane.
And then the second... Okay, the second
is even more ambitious and crazy, was
whatever we made, whatever
we pitched had to have the
potential to have World
of Warcraft-like revenue.
- Yeah. Right.
- And to date, at that point, there
was one game that had World of
Warcraft-like revenue, which
was World of Warcraft,
so...Immediately, I just
threw out the revenue thing
'cause it's all fucking
Monopoly money to me.
Like, this game money is... It's
insane, and I just don't think
about it. That's someone else's problem.
But I did want to be as realistic as
I could about the schedule part
of it. So most of our team, the
Titan team, was 140-some people. Most
of that team got moved to go work on
Heroes of the Storm, the
D3 expansion, World of
Warcraft, Hearthstone. So immediately,
a large number of the team was gone. Then we
had a bunch of, like, what we called temp
loans- ... people that someday were gonna
come back to us, but we loaned off for,
like, six-month tour of duty.
And then there was a very small
team. There was a group of
engineers that was mothballing
Titan, so it exists somewhere at
Blizzard at that point. And they
were also deconstructing the
engine because they knew it didn't
work anymore, and to make a
new game, it had to be way
reconsidered to sort of what it is
today. And then there was a very small
creative group that was supposed to come up
with these three pitches and
given six weeks. And we just sort
of arbitrarily decided, like,
let's spend two weeks on each
pitch. The ground rules that I sort of led
with is you have to be all
in for the two weeks on the
pitch. So if we're... You
know, pitch one was a
StarCraft MMO, and we have
to live and breathe and want
it more than anything. And I kind of
warned everybody. I said, "At the end of
this two weeks, you're going to
think this is the only game idea,
and you're not going to be invested in the next,
but we're going to throw it out as soon as we
finish it and do the next
one." And the StarCraft
MMO, I actually really loved
that pitch. It was called
StarCraft Frontiers. And
the concept was, like,
less of you're playing, like, space
marine. Like, it was less armies.
StarCraft the RTS is always about the
three races and the giant armies.
And kind of what made WoW wow and separate
from the Warcraft RTS series was that
instead of being, like, a footman in the
army in World of Warcraft, you were like a
lone adventurer, you know,
make your mark on the
world. So we had this idea, it was this
old Chris Metzen drawing of a space
prospector. And I love that
idea that, like, somewhere
out in, like, where all the
giant StarCraft battles were
happening, you know, thousands
of Zerg and Protoss and
Terran, there's, like, this, like, lone
prospector on some planet, like, going
through, like, a mysterious dungeon-
... you know, looking for minerals but
finding monsters. Like, it was that
kind of spirit of-
- That's awesome
- ... more on the ground level.
- I didn't even think about that because my
intuition with a StarCraft MMO would be the
soldier as part of the army, right? The
prospector. That's such a beautiful
vision. Yeah.
- Yeah, I—
- Looking for the resources and on
the way finding the monsters.
- You want to be on the ground— Like,
what's it like on the ground floor?
And I don't want to be a
minion in a giant army. I want
to— I want to be Indiana
Jones in space, you know?
- Nice.
- Um, so then there was this
Metzen picture of the
prospector, and then two of the most amazing
artists, Arnold Tsang and Peter Lee.
Arnold's the great character artist.
Peter Lee's the great environment
artist. They did this
concept art for Frontiers
that was Metzen's space
prospector. He's smoking a
cigar- ... and he's got his
foot on a Hydralisk skull.
- Nice.
- And then there's, like, a Medivac in the
background, and they're on this, like, big
alien planet. And, like, that
picture, you just wanted to
like, "Here's my money. I'll pre-order
now. Like, sign me up for that game." Um,
that picture ended up being McCree
from Overwatch. We redid it.
- Nice.
- Um, but, but yeah, that's
where McCree actually came
from. So that was the StarCraft
Frontiers idea. We kind of, we went
all in on the design. We had a
world design. We had class design,
like how, how the classes would work what
progression might look like. And you
also have to think when you're trying to
design an MMO, like, what could
expansions and live content be
like? And we put together
a really good pitch.
We all knew there's no way
you can make this game.
Like, this, even though it was more
focused than Titan, it's five years on
Blizzard's best day with
nothing going wrong, in
perfect scenario, five years to make that
game probably with, you know, 150 to 200
people. Like, these 40 people
are not making that game in two
years. So as much as I...
Like, again, that was an idea,
not a vision, 'cause it lacked, it lacked
the path to reality, you know? There-
- 'Cause that's a legit large-scale MMO
in a world that you haven't quite
developed in the way that an MMO
needs that was really crafted
for the arts or the real-time strategy
formulation of StarCraft. And it's in
space. It's-
It's... It would, it would take... I mean, it would
be incredible, but it would be a five-year and
realistically even more.
- Like, an endless thing that you'd spin
on on that team. You're making the
StarCraft game. How do you
get from planet to planet?
Is it a cut scene? No one's going
to want a cut scene, but we
should probably make it a cut scene because
that's easy, but well, we gotta have space
flight.
That... You're adding, like, three years just
by saying, "We gotta have space flight."
- You are. Yeah.
- And then how do you make a space game
without space flight? We've all played
them. We know, we know those games, so.
- So are you essentially, when you're
brainstorming like that, and by the way, such an
incredible thing, for two weeks, you're
just really falling in love with the game
altogether and trying to figure out if
it's actually possible. So if you're
developing that, are you just constantly
trying to say, like, "What is the
simplest possible thing we
can do that's a complete
world?" Like, are you constantly trying
to simplify or you're allowing yourself
to go big?
- So when you're brainstorming and
you're with the team and you're the
creative leader, it's, "Guys,
what's fucking amazing?"
What's big? What do players
need? There's a Blizzard
design value called "What is the fantasy?"
What is the fantasy? You
want to be in space.
you want to be in the StarCraft universe,
and then your job as the game director,
and if you have a great creative
director, art director, tech
director, the director
should be scoping it back
into reality. The mistake
I see on a lot of game
teams is scope becomes
a production problem.
You give it to the project
managers or the executives
or the producers to say,
"No, there's not enough
time." Or, "You guys
should hire more," 'cause-
- Right.
- Like, what do executives,
what do those types
have at their disposal that they can
hit you with meetings in Outlook
and tell you that you can hire more
people? That's not really how you get
the game made.
- That's why they get paid the big bucks.
- The scoping, your best-case scenario is
when your tech director, art director,
and game director are doing the scoping.
Um, because then you know, like,
this part we gotta spend big
bucks on. There's no getting
around it. This part we
can cheat. If you have
a giant team and one
guy's job is just to make props,
you know, crates and chairs,
that guy's going to make the... You
know, that's a triple A awesome
developer who's going to put his
heart and soul into it. If you let
him, he'll take, you know,
six weeks to make a crate.
You have to have that moment where
you're like, "I kind of need 200
crates. So just spend,
like, a couple hours on
that one." And that's a hard
thing to say to somebody.
- You're doing this kind of
scope carving while also
talking about what is the fantasy.
So you're, there's a tension there that you're
constantly dancing with. So you're allowing
yourself to think big, but then sculping
it down, and doing that, what, on a
scale of days in this case, like?
- Yeah. We had two weeks,
so, and I don't think
we were... I was working on
weekends, but we weren't getting the
group together. So it's, you
know, like 10 working days.
- And then you, like, shut it
off and go to idea number two?
- Yeah. Idea number two was Crossworlds.
That was a Metzen vision for a universe,
and, like, I'm glad Metzen's back at
Blizzard, and I hope they
make this game someday.
The way Chris described it was there's
a planet on the edge of the universe
that's like the Mos Eisley space
port with all these, you know,
freakish aliens and people
from all walks of life-
- Nice
- ... and it's kind of seedy and criminal.
And there's traders and
smugglers and diplomats
and... But this one planet
is sort of the planet that
they've agreed to like meet on,
and this is like the neutral
place, and then the game was going
to take place on that planet, so-
- This is awesome.
- Yeah. So that was more of like
a world IP driven one that
was really inspired by Chris.
- And that allows you to play with
different characters, different... I like
that, I like that idea a lot,
because it's the meeting place
of different worlds, and then you
can allow your imagination to drive
what the worlds from which they
came from are like. So you don't
have to design those worlds.
- No, you, you don't have to design
them, but then they're yours. Like,
if the players really are reacting
to, like, the Green People planet-
... or whatever, and someday you're like,
"Hey, what expansion should we make?"
"I don't know. Green People planet."
- Green People, yeah.
- Like, "Let's do it."
- I like it.
- So it was actually that, it was CrossWorlds,
we were working on CrossWorlds,
and like the StarCraft
Frontiers, you know, for
for Frontiers, we were having the class
meetings, you know, how class progression work,
like, the game designery stuff. And
on CrossWorlds, we were having a class
meeting of, like a big decision in, like, RPG
type games is always, are you doing,
like, skill based or class based?
And it's usually some combination
of those, but class based, you're
like choosing, "I'm going to be a
warrior, therefore I use sword and
shield, and I do these
things." Where more of
a skill base is everybody's
kind of an avatar, and then
the skills that you pick
define, so I might take
that I know how to use swords. So
you're kind of making those decisions,
and with all things game design,
there's no right or wrong.
It's all trade-offs. So the trade-off
decision we were making is like, "Oh, I
think we want to be class based with this
CrossWorlds thing,"
and we were in a design meeting and
one of my favorite designers of all
time is a guy named Jeff Goodman.
He was one of the original
WoW encounter designer, he
designed like Onyxia and all the
big raid bosses. Like, if someone
has a favorite raid boss, Jeff
probably designed it. And he just kind of
off the cuff said in this meeting, "He
said, "I wish instead of making, like, six
classes, I wish we could make 50 classes.
And I wish instead of having, like, you
know, 100 abilities on the classes, the
50 classes all just had, like,
one or two things that was really
interesting about them." And
then the class meeting ended.
Like, we designed our six classes
in that meeting, and then the
meeting ended. And I was back at my desk,
and it just stuck with me what Jeff had
said about the way he
wished he could design the
classes. And then I also had... We had this
directory of all the amazing Titan art.
And I started pulling up
Arnold Tsang's characters.
Arnold's vision and his art is second to
none. And I started taking some of the old
Titan characters that we had
designed. We had a class called the
Jumper, and the Jumper could,
like, teleport forward and
rewind time and come
back. And the Jumper used
dual-wield pistols, which
was, at the time, designed
after my dual G18s from Modern Warfare
2. It was my favorite loadout.
Uh, I was just cribbing Infinity Ward.
That's where Tracer's guns came from.
And we had all these, like, different guns,
like, some that bloomed and some that, you
know, had this, like, really
crazy recoil, and we had other
types of guns. And I took
every version of, like, the
Titan Jumper, and I just
distilled it into what
I thought was the best
version of the Jumper,
which was, you know, the
dual-wield pistols, the blink, the
recall, and time bomb. And
then I took Arnold Tsang
art, and I went, you
know, to Arnold, and I'm
like, "What if this wasn't,
like, a class? You know, who is
this as a person, not a class?" And
Arnold, "Uh, what if she's British,
and her name's Tracer?" And, like,
that was the origin of Overwatch. And some
of the pragmatic part
of that was I knew that
Geoff Goodman was gonna be on
this team, and I knew that
Arnold Tsang was gonna be on this
team. And it's a play to your
strengths moment. Like, what could we make
in two years with the talent we have,
and what is realistic? Like, what
could we realistically make?
And so then I just sat there, and I sort
of I went through a bunch of Titan classes
with a guy named The Gunjack, who was...
became Reaper. We had... Actually, the
Ranger got split out and became 76,
and became Bastion of all things.
- You're describing the game
of Overwatch where exactly
that vision from that meeting-
- Yes.
- ... came to life for you. As opposed
to having a small number of classes
with a large number of skills,
you have a large number
of heroes with each their distinct
look, distinct set of skills.
- Yeah, and persona- the personality
was a big part of it, like
capturing... This isn't some generic, the
Jumper. It's this person, Lena Oxton.
You know? And she has a
life, and we're gonna, you
know, make you interested in her.
- Yeah, there's, like, a deep backstory.
And that's also what's interesting about
Overwatch, is that backstory
is not, like, revealed in,
in a direct way. It's,
it sort of, like, seeps
in indirectly throughout the game.
So, the backstory is implied almost.
- Yeah.
- And it's told not directly. So, there's a
lot of ideas like this. And so you're...
This is the thing that
the team converged to.
- Yeah. Well, and it was funny because,
like, we're having these Cross
World. Like, people are, you know,
writing design docs and doing
concept art for Cross World. And, you know,
we'd have some brainstorm meetings every
day, and I put together...
It was a seven- page deck,
Overwatch deck. And it was called
Monetized Shooter at the time.
- Yeah.
- And it just said, "Monetized
Shooter." And then the
first slide was League of Legends
plus Team Fortress 2 logos.
- Yeah.
- And then I had, like, six
heroes, like, sloppily
designed. And as everybody
was working on Cross Worlds
there were two, you know, co-leaders of
that team for... There was, you
know... Chris Metzen was there,
and Ray Gresko. And I remember Ray coming
over. Uh, Ray is, like, a phenomenal
game developer of all time. He,
like, wrote the Dark Forces
engine, was the production director on
Diablo III. He and I killed Titan. And then
he's at my desk looking over
my shoulder, and he's like,
"Well, what are you working on? Is this the Cross
Worlds pitch?" I'm like, "No, this is, like,
another idea that I'm just working on
on the side." And I show him the seven
slides, and he just looks at me,
and he says, "Go show Metzen this.
This is what we should make instead." And
then I went and I showed Metzen, like,
"Hey, this is, hey, this
is just an idea." And then
Metzen was like, "Yes." You know,
like, "This is what we should make."
And I showed Arnold, and it
was Arnold's art. And then
Ray tells me, he's like... 'Cause we
would- Every morning, we'd get the team
together 'cause we were in this dire,
you know, dire straits, and we're
midway through at that
point. And Ray and a
producer named Matt Hawley said,
"Tomorrow morning at the meeting,
you're gonna pitch this Monetized
Shooter idea." It was called
Monetized Shooter because originally
when I pitched it, it was free to
play and you had to buy the
heroes, which is fucking
terrible, but at the time, I actually
thought that was a good idea.
And I'm walking down the hall with
Matt Hawley to go, like, pitch this
to this group, you know, out of- we're supposed
to be working on CrossWorld, and they're like,
"You gotta pitch this idea to them." And
Matt Hawley stops me in the hall and says,
"You, Jeff, you cannot
go into that meeting. I
refuse to put up a deck in front
of the team where the first slide
says, 'Monetized Shooter.'"
"They'll hate that, and that's
not the spirit of who we are-"
"... as, you know, creative devel-" And I'm like,
"Yeah, you're right." Like, well no one was
supposed to see his deck anyway.
You guys are all looking over my
shoulder. He's like, "You need to put a
name on it." I'm like, "It's
Overwatch." Like, right on the
spot, I said the name was Overwatch.
And where that had come from
was when we were working on Titan, I was
really angry about this. We did this
fake... I did not do this,
another leader on the team did
this, of this fake,
like, we're gonna put up
whiteboards and everyone gets to vote
for their favorite name for Titan.
But the person who did it
already had a name in mind-
... for the game. And just kept
pushing towards that name.
And the thing that got the most
votes was Overwatch. Overwatch in
Titan was, like, a police group,
essentially. But somebody had
written Overwatch on that
board and it got the most votes. So I
basically named the game Overwatch to,
like, high five my team- ... and
kind of middle finger. Like—
Don't act like it's a democracy
when it's not. You know? So...
- So it's a middle finger.
So Overwatch, and then the, I mean,
the rest is history. So what,
what, in that slide deck, is that,
in that slide deck, were, did you
already have a kind of crawl, walk, run idea
of, of the way this would be developed?
- So my deck was terrible.
People actually... there's a
thing called the Jeff Deck, which
is it's always gray with black
writing and then the default,
like, PowerPoint blue shapes,
because I just don't bother
making it look good-
... Besides dragging Arnold Tsang's
art, you know, desecrating it
into my deck. We put together...
We had this amazing game designer
on the Overwatch team, a
guy named Jeremy Craig who's now actually
game directing a game over at Bonfire.
Um, Jeremy, not only was he a great
game designer, but he had the
ability to sell things better than anybody
else, visually. So Jeremy took my shitty
deck, and then we had lots more, like,
creative brainstorms and we thought through
the game of Overwatch a lot
more, and then he made this
gorgeous pitch deck that we pitched. We
first had to go through the Blizzard
production and game directors
for them to approve it and
give it their thumbs up,
then we had to go through the Blizzard
executives, then we had to go through Activision.
Um, and in that deck, because we had to
speak to schedule, we had to
speak to two things that were
tough to speak to. One, we
had to speak to schedule,
and we came up with this concept
of crawl, walk, run. We had
identified the reason Titan
failed is we just tried to
run, we tried to come up with the
next World of Warcraft. But if
you think about World of Warcraft, it
had Warcraft I, II, and III to build
upon to even get to the point
where people gave a shit enough
about that world to want to live in
the world of Warcraft. So the idea was
that instead of trying to cut
right to World of Warcraft,
let's try to honor Warcraft I, essentially.
So this first game is just to establish
that there's a universe you
might give a shit about.
We also knew that the timeframe
we were given of two years,
there was no way to create a
compelling PvE experience,
so we just kinda randomly put dates in a
slide of crawl, walk, run, thinking it was
aspirational, and really,
we were just trying to save
ourselves. Like, don't
cancel the, don't cancel
us. You know, this team can
make something great. The other
part that we had to talk
to too was, like, a mobile
strategy. Like, at that time, it
was like, everything has to be
also on mobile, which I think
is the dumbest thing ever.
And so literally what we did
is, this was Jeremy's brilliant
part, we had a picture with
all the boxes and then one of
them is, like, a tablet
with just a fucking
Photoshop of, you know, Arnold's
art on it. We're like, "And also-"
- Mobile
- "... it'll be on mobile."
- Brilliant.
But I think this crawl, walk, run idea
is really nice. So the initial idea
is you would have basically a shooter with all
these different characters, all these heroes, and
then the walk would be the PvE
version of that, co-op. And then
if people really fall in love with the
world, then you build a big MMO around
it. Quick pause for a
bathroom break. Quick
30-second thank you to our sponsors.
Check them out in the description. It
really is the best way to
support this podcast. Go to
lexfriedman.com/sponsors. We got Fin
for customer service AI agents,
Blitzy for code generation
in large code bases, BetterHelp
for mental health-...
Shopify for selling stuff online,
CodeRabbit for AI-powered
code review, and Perplexity for
curiosity-driven knowledge
exploration. Choose wisely, my
friends. And now, back
to my conversation with
Jeff Kaplan. And we should also say that
there's a whole world that was
built around Overwatch. And
one of the ideas was... So,
Warcraft is a very particular
kind of world. StarCraft is a particular
kind of world. Diablo is a particular
kind of world. And you wanted
to bring Overwatch to Earth and
make it positive. You give
this talk where there was a
lot of respect paid to the sort of dark,
gritty, post-apocalyptic games on Earth.
Also gave a lot of respect to the
ultra- realistic first-person shooter
games like Call of Duty.
And you wanted to create something more
that paints a vision of a near-term
hopeful future, and fun,
and more sort of surreal,
versus like ultra-real. So it's
interesting to talk through
how a world comes to life. How
you think about that world, how
you create the tone of the game,
how you think, how you craft
in this vision. And not just,
like, different characters like
Tracer and so on, like what the
personality is, but, like, bringing the
world to life in which they will
be. What was that process like?
- The, the process was a blast.
And, like, the goal was that
bright, hopeful future. And the
other phrase we used all the
time on the team was, "A
future worth fighting for."
- Mm-hmm, yes.
- You know, if there's gonna be all this fighting,
like the... it kinda has to be worth it for
something. Picking the
locations in the world
was the funnest thing. You know,
there's just a group of us
who would sit around, and be like,
"Where do you wanna go?" You
know, "Santorini looks
amazing." And you're looking at
pictures, and like, "Let's make
that place." You know in a
video game people are gonna spend hours
and hours in a location. Resist the
urge to do the common, I call
them the cargo container
mazes, that you see in every
game. And I know why they
exist, they're easy to make, but
we kinda wanted Overwatch to
be this world tour of great
places that you'd wanna go to. Or in
the case of like Oasis, it's like,
okay, maybe Iraq, back when we
were making this game, wasn't the
top of people's list, but
what is the bright, hopeful
version of what that could look like? Um,
so we just really tried to
sell this idea of these
aspirational locations.
One, just to get people
thinking about different places on
Planet Earth and how awesome they all
are. But also, from
like a pure game design
standpoint, you're gonna
spend a lot of time in the
environment, so the environment should
be pleasing and not oppressive.
- Can you go through some of the heroes
that you ended up putting in the game?
Maybe a good way to do it is,
which are your favorites? And
what's from the best of your
knowledge of the internet, favorites?
- My favorite... I have a couple
favorite heroes. Obviously, Tracer.
- She's the OG.
- The OG, the cornerstone. You know,
we put her on the front of the
box. She was that moment
of, "We should just take
the best of the best," and we
know this gameplay is good and
solid. And it's so simple. Like,
the mechanics are very easy to
explain to somebody. It's very
easy to pick up. The first
time anybody hits recall
for the first time and they
try to wrap their mind around
like, "Wait, does that mean if
I..." You know, and they're
mapping out the possibilities.
- And by the way, we should say
that it's a PvP game with six
versus six at first and
where there's three
distinct roles that people take on those,
On a team. And those roles, at first,
I guess were not required. Like, you
can reallocate those roles
as you wanted. And then
to maximize the fun, you add a
little bit of structure. You
enforce two per role, and the role
being tank, support, and damage.
So, that. And then there's all the kinds of
heroes that are associated with the different
roles, and people pick and
there's lore. And some people
are probably like hardcore
just one particular hero.
And so there's a lot of personality and
story and community that builds
around each of the heroes. And,
but at the end of the day,
it is just a fun shooter.
- Yeah. Our goal was to pay
homage to the shooters before
us that we loved. There's no way you can
talk about Overwatch without
talking about Team Fortress 2.
Uh, Team Fortress started as a Quake
mod which was brilliant, and I played
tons of. Then there was Team Fortress
Classic that came out with Half-Life 1.
And then Team Fortress 2, I think
everything about it blew everybody away
when it came out in 2007.
And there's obviously just
huge influence there. But the
shooter mechanics of Overwatch
are... They hearken back to what people
call the arcade or arena shooter
genre. Which pains me 'cause I never... Back
in the day, I didn't think of Quake as a
arcade shooter. It was almost an insulting
way of saying it. But just the fast
movement really epic, over-the-top
weapons. You have a low time to kill, or
TTK, that players call it. Meaning
you're very survivable, you can take
a few hits. Where, in a game like Call of
Duty or Counter-Strike, if you get
shot in the head, you're just dead
right away. Um, so it was supposed to
be this explosive, larger than life,
fun, arcade-y shooter- with
a lot of teamwork involved.
- And so you said Tracer up
there? She's the OG. Who else?
- McCree. McCree is another,
like, I'm somebody who's
attracted to the simplicity
and design. And I did not
design McCree's six shooter. The way that
gun feels is phenomenal,
and to capture the spirit
of that, we had a designer named
Mike Heiberg designed the High Noon
ultimate. And then just all
the care and love the team put
in, like when he does the ultimate,
we roll a tumbleweed across
the screen like every time.
It's a very simple hero, but
the simplicity is what I like
best in design. I'm not a fan of
when somebody starts explaining, you know,
in any of these games, whether they're
MOBAs or hero shooters, and
they start, like, "This guy
throws orbs, and he throws three
orbs, and then he runs out of
his orb bank, and then he can call the
orbs back, or he can catch the
orbs." And I'm just, my head
is spinning, and I'm like, "Just give
me a fucking good gun." You know?
And I'm done.
- Simplicity is everything. Uh,
what about Reinhardt, the tank?
- Reinhardt was actually my
main. So I played the most of
Reinhardt. That was another
amazing Geoff Goodman
design of this guy who just has a
shield. As soon as you give somebody
a shield, they know what to
do. They go into protector
mode. The shield was designed
to shoot through. The shield
has since been copied by like
every hero shooter since, and
even non-hero shooters. And
then he just has a giant
Rocket Hammer. And he
does a charge ability.
It's really interesting where
the charge ability came from.
I was playing a ton of
Left 4 Dead 2, and there
you could play in versus mode where
you could be the enemy zombie guys.
And there was an enemy boss
zombie called The Charger who had
that charge ability. And I thought,
the reason that ability was so cool
is because it's a commit. Once you press
the button, you're a runaway train.
And watching Reinhardts charge to
their deaths is kind of hilarious,
and it's what separates a
great Rein from a shitty one.
- Uh, you've explained that the
Overwatch matchmaker process
is designed to keep players at a
50% win rate. I think it's just a
fascinating topic. Not to get
too philosophical, but you can't
have the up without the
down, hence the 50%. Can,
can you speak to the complexity of
like what makes a good matchmaker?
- The matchmaking systems are
some of the most complex
design and engineering tasks you're
ever gonna tackle. And they're
thankless. It's very hard, too,
because I think most people, and they're
not being disingenuous, like if you ask a
gamer, "What do you want?" They're like, "I just
want a fair match. Like, just make it even."
And the reality what they want is
they want a match where they're
slightly better than the other guy.
Like, they want it to feel like
it was close but then win.
And you can't architect
that. Like, there, it's, you
know, it's a zero sum situation, so
there's gotta be winners and
there's gotta be losers. The other
really core problem, and we would study
this all the time when people would
complain. You know, you see a Reddit post,
and somebody would say,
"I had a six game losing
streak. This is so fucked. It's
the worst matchmaker ever."
- Mm-hmm. Oh, Reddit.
- Yeah, right? I love Reddit.
But we would look up that person's account.
I would do that all the time. I love
looking up people's accounts and seeing-
... what would happen. It's like, yeah, he had
the six game losing streak. He had an eight game
winning streak before that. There
was no post about how awesome is
this. And the human psychology
doesn't allow for that. The
... One of my hindsight regrets
about Overwatch, and this
is, I think we did the right
thing in the moment. It's you
know, like, I wouldn't go
back and redo it, but if I
was making a hero shooter
from scratch today,
I would make it less team focused. And we,
we put all of our eggs in you
noticing if the team won or lost.
And we downplayed your individual
contribution as much as
possible. There wasn't a scoreboard.
We had a medal system, but the
medal system was, in my
opinion, it was not good
because the losing team got medals and
the winning team got medals. And on the
losing team, they would use that. They
would weaponize it against their teammate.
"Well, I'm the top kills, and all
you guys are making us lose." And
it's like, "Okay, you're the top
kills by like one, and you guys still
lost." So I would, if I was to redo it
today, or for any aspiring hero shooter
makers out there, I would actually downplay
the team factor, and try to put more
focus on individual contribution. Because
that's just how people play. They're
selfish. And I don't mean
that in a bad way. It's
just, it's that human
nature, they can't help.
- And in terms of how they experience the
game, in terms of how they derive joy from
it, or how they see the challenge of
the game is individual. Even when
you're on a team, you're still feeling-
... it's individual, fundamental
individual experience. Uh,
let me, as a small aside,
before I forget, since we
mentioned first person shooters so
much, outside of Overwatch, what are
some of the great shooters?...
of all time that you've played?
- Quake is the greatest.
- Quake is GOAT.
- Yeah. Quake is GOAT. There's
a lot of contenders up there.
- What have you logged the most
hours in outside of the games?
- Rust.
- Okay. Can you... Okay. Uh, a lot of folks
have written to me that I need to play Rust,
the video game. I have not, have not even
looked into it. Somebody on Reddit
said it has a steep learning
curve. I would like to give it a
chance because I've spoke... You have,
to me, spoken so highly of
it. So can you explain Rust?
- Yeah. Rust is an open world game.
It's a procedural map, so it
means that every time it's
different. You're always on an island,
and it resets every month. So-
- Is it PvP?
- It's all PvP. In fact, Rust is
the most PvP thing in all of PvP.
- Well, I don't know what that means, but-
- Rust players know what that means.
- Everybody who plays Rust and loves it
sounds to me like they're in a cult.
So with all due respect,
please don't write me letters.
- They're too busy playing Rust. They're too
busy checking on their base, making sure it's
not raided, to write you letters.
- Oh, good.
- Um, it takes place... It's
basically... It's open world.
You can do whatever you want. There's
not really any directed gameplay to
it, but at any time, any other player can
kill you and take anything that's on you.
- Oh, wow.
- Yeah, and then you build what
Rust players call bases, and you
upgrade the base, and you try to
make the base as safe as possible to
store your stuff, and then you can make
explosives and blow up
other people's walls to
get into their base where they're
keeping all their best stuff
and take all their shit.
- It, like, permanently?
- Permanently. Like-
- Oh, I see
- ... it would be like PvPing in
WoW. Imagine in World of Warcraft-
... if somebody could not only kill you
but take everything that's in
your bank and make you level
one the next time you log in.
- Wow. That's very stressful.
- The beauty of Rust, and why it's so good,
is you can't have the high highs
without the low lows. And-
- Like, real low lows.
- Real low lows.
- Wow. All right.
- Like, debilitating, like, "Am I
ever gonna play this game?" lows.
- Right.
- You know, like, you spend
a week building the
world's most perfect base and
getting tons of loot, and
then it... There's what's
called online raiding
and offline raiding.
Online raiding means that
my enemy is... I can see that
they're in their base right
now, and I'm gonna try to attack
them while they're in their base.
Offlining, which is, like, all
Rust players will say you're the
scum of the Earth if you
offline someone, and
then all Rust players also
offline people all the time.
- Ah.
- Yeah. It's—
- Yes
- ... gamer etiquette.
- Yes.
- Um, offline's when, like,
"Hey, I think that my
neighbor logged off for the night.
You know, they, they just played six
hours. I've been watching them, and
now there's no activity in their
base, so I'm gonna, like, blow up their walls
and take up all their stuff when they're not
here."
- Mm-hmm. Yeah. So Rust, because real life is
not hard enough, is what it sounds like.
Just, I want... If I want—
- That'd be a great tag.
- If I want more stress in my life, I'll
play Rust. Yeah. I can't wait. So
okay, so that's one. That, that
sounds like a unique experience
and a great joy. So quick
number one, Rust is up there.
- Call of Duty.
- Call of Duty just has its own-
- You, you know, there's a lot of
haters. Like, Call of Duty 4
and Modern Warfare 2 were
the pinnacle of Call of
Duty, with Black Ops being
a very respectable, you
know, third. But you're
never gonna get a better
gun feel from a game
than— Like, just study
the visual effects, the
animation, the modeling, the
sounds. Every aspect of shooting a gun in
Call of Duty is so masterfully done. And
then the maps, like, the flow
of the multiplayer is just
great. Like, there's... There's
a map called Crash from
Call of Duty 4 that Erin Keller
and I... Erin's now the game
director on Overwatch. We just
sat and studied that map, or
Terminal from Modern
Warfare 2. Just studied the
maps of just, like, this
map design is off the
hook. So Call of Duty
is definitely up there.
- So even though you were not
thinking about it Overwatch
ended up being a gigantic success. So
did you start thinking about, in
this framework of crawl, walk,
run, about the walk, the PvE piece?
- Yes. So the PvE piece was what
Overwatch 2 was supposed to be.
And I don't know if people
know this or not, but we
started working on Overwatch 2 in 2015.
- ♪ Over- ♪
- So, Overwatch 1 didn't
ship until 2016. So before
Overwatch... And it wasn't like work in
earnest. It was like pitching the game.
Um, I remember I spent a lot
of time... It was myself,
Chris Metzen, and Michael
Chu sort of brainstorming a
framework for what, like,
a campaign could look
like. And we had this idea
of, like, a cooperative
PvE shooter. And we
actually pitched it to the
team before we launched because we were
trying to put a bunch of runway in front
of us. That worked against us, and it's
one of my biggest mistakes I've made
as a creative leader in my career, was
Overwatch 2. There were two points of failure
for me. The first was, I
had people on the game team
who didn't like PvP or
competitive shooters,
and they really loved the Overwatch
universe and wanted to play these
characters and heroes, but they wanted
to kind of do it on their own terms
in like a PvE setting. So even though
Overwatch is this like runaway success
and everybody's talking about it, they
felt like they couldn't really engage
with it. And so like people on
the dev team are like, "Okay, thank God
we, you know, shipped that PvP thing-"
"... When do we start work on
this other thing?" So that came
from a genuine place of excitement.
And then the other point of pressure
was from the executive
team, and this was both the
Blizzard and more so the
Activision executive
teams, and they started really putting
the heat on, "Well, you said Overwatch
2 was gonna be out in 2019."
And they're referring back to
these slides that were
just crazy dates. Like-
... it was... You never want
to put a PowerPoint deck
in front of a corporate executive.
Like, you might as well
etch it in stone and come
down from the mountain on it.
- So you just threw some dates
because the layout looked good.
- Yeah. This is just all bullshit.
This is just... In the same way we
put, like, the tablet, you know?
We just put Overwatch, like put
Tracer on a tablet and say we have a
mobile strategy.
So the executives started getting really
angry at us that Overwatch 2 was slipping,
slipping. And so when Overwatch 1 took off,
I remember very early, we were in like
May of 2016, and that year the
Olympics were gonna be in Rio, I
think. Um, and, you know, I always
like to pay respects to, like, when a
big event is happening, I'm like,
"Hey, we should do, like, an
event for the Olympics." You can't call it
the Olympics or else they sue you, so you
just... Even though you're
advertising for them
to a bunch of kids who want to play video
games and not watch the Olympics. But
we also had like these two
developers, Mike Heiberg and Dave
Adams, like worked on this
quirky... Like, they made
soccer in Overwatch. We
called it Lúcioball.
Like, they made a map and they
made these mechanics. We're like,
"Yeah, we... Let's do an event
called the Summer Games."
And we do a live patch
that's the Summer Games.
It's extremely successful. And then after
that, we're like, "Yeah, let's
do... Halloween's coming up.
Let's do a Halloween event. How cool will
that be?" And our fans just loved these
events, but there were two
groups that were struggling with
it. One was that group I told you on the
dev team who was like,
"Oh my God, you guys are
over-scoping the patches.
Why are we doing this
Halloween event? We should be doing... We
should start work on Overwatch 2.
We shouldn't be this focused on
the live game," which was fucking
nuts. Like, that was just
crazy. There's this phrase of
catch the wave, ride the wave. Most
games fall off the back of the
wave. They don't catch the wave. No
one plays it or plays it for two
weeks. If you're lucky enough to have
caught the wave- ... ride it till the end.
And my instincts at that point were like,
"Let's just keep... How many more of these
live events can we do?"
- So yeah. So now there's
this wave in the live game
and events, but the pressure on
creating Overwatch 2 was building.
- Yeah. We had a coalition on the
team that was... Really wanted
Overwatch 2 built instead of the
live events. And then the executive
pressure became monumental. And what
would have been correct was to do more
world events, like keep it going, but
the major derail was Overwatch League.
And we really like... The
weirdest part about Overwatch
League is I believe in it.
You know, I helped pitch
it along with some other
people. We thought it
was like the future of esports
and doing regional based
teams, ensuring minimum
player salaries and player
protections. Like, there was a lot
of very good about Overwatch League.
- And there would be teams
associated with particular cities.
- Yes.
- And it would be international. It would
be real competition. So the dream,
the ambition was really huge there.
- Yeah. The teams part of the
dream was more of like regional
based, player protection, try to make
esports more of a first class citizen,
because there were all these stories about
like shady teams, you know,
screwing their players over.
Where it got away from us was there was a
lot of excitement about Overwatch League,
like too much so, and then
it got over marketed to the
people buying the teams. They went on
this road show where they
had a deck basically, and
like you could put anything in a
deck and sell anything, and they
were pretty much selling
the Brooklyn Bridge,
that Overwatch League was going
to be more popular than the NFL.
And we got a bunch of......
billionaire investors in these teams.
And when 2018 started, like
for example the day I got
back, they said, "We signed
this huge deal with Twitch
for streaming of Overwatch League,"
like a media rights deal. And
that means that here's all
these commitments we made
for Overwatch League of like in-game
stuff that had to exist. Like a lot
of it was integration
with Twitch and camera
control and that kind of stuff. The
other part of it was a bunch of skins
and you know, uniforms for all the
teams, which was not just getting
the art in the game, but there was
huge technical challenges to,
like, how all that worked
and was efficient and hit the right,
you know, memory footprint and all of
that kind of stuff. And so all of
your plans at that point kind
of go out the window. Like
you're not gonna work on new world
events. You're not really even focused
on Overwatch 2, you're just
kind of treading water.
There was a lot of talk of like,
"Oh God, you know, the deal, like,
the deal didn't go well and we've got to
do make goods to make the deal better
for them." I'm like, "Just give them
some money back, you know?" Like, if
you... The deal isn't what people wanted,
like, putting it on us, the Overwatch
team, to, like, support this beast.
And it was a great idea that
the wrong instincts and sort of, I
don't know how to phrase this in a way
that's not damning, but there was too
much focus on, "Let's
make lots of money really
fast." And a lot of people got dragged into
it. And while Overwatch League was great
for Overwatch in terms of
the players that it brought
in, like and the Overwatch League players,
they were awesome. I love them.
The Overwatch League staff
at Blizzard, some of the nicest, most
motivated, great creative people-
... like all of these organizations
got built and they were all
great, but it was a house
of cards waiting to fall.
- And when it became more
about the money versus,
The quality of the experience of the
different teams playing together and
actually building this
ecosystem of esports.
- The financial reality kicked in,
where these teams now, we didn't just
have, you know, executives at
Activision and Blizzard who cared
about the bottom line of Overwatch.
We had all these people who
basically invested in the game, and
then they started to express
their opinions. Originally, the
business model was going to be that
they were going to do in-person
events and there's going to
be big ticket sales and then
merch, you know, and all of that.
And I think really quickly
everybody learned like, yeah, we
can't do in-game events when you have
a London team and a Shanghai team
and, like, how does this work? So that
fell apart super quickly. The merch was
good, but it wasn't going to
be making NFL level money-
... whatever insanity anybody
thought that was going to be.
So everybody quickly
defaulted back to, "Hey,
didn't Overwatch make like $500 million
just in the live game last year?
What can we sell and what can you
give us?" That pressure
comes onto the team,
and then the pressure to ship Overwatch
2 and all care and love that we had
for, like, the live game and the live
server, "Let's just make events and new
heroes and new maps," we're losing all
these resources. And it got to the
point, you know, my exit at
Blizzard, I believed in Overwatch
2. I think we could have made
a great game. I have a lot of hindsight of,
like, how I would have designed that game
differently with what I know now versus
what ultimately we didn't ship.
And there's Overwatch 2 is out
now, but it's not the Overwatch
2 that we planned and announced.
- So when you're referring to Overwatch 2 in
this conversation, you're referring to the PvE
version?
- The PvE version.
- Which, by the way, I
would have loved to play.
I'm one of the people that were...
Overwatch is great, but the
PvP, but I would have loved
to play the PvE version.
- I think everybody would have loved
to have played it. And there's a
misconception online that all I cared
about was PvE and I didn't care about PvP.
All of the Overwatch 2 PvP maps were
something that I said to the team
over and over, "We have a PvP
audience. If we get anything right,
it has to be the PvP." We would
be lucky to welcome these PvE
players, but that's not guaranteed.
So it was never a PvE only focus.
- It's just almost expanding
it to also the E.
- Yeah. And what eventually broke me was it
used to be like in 2016 and 2017, I felt
very in control of the Overwatch
team and the direction of the
game as a game director, you
know, working with Ray Gresko as the production
director, it felt like we were running
Overwatch. And we were very, very
successful and doing a good job.
And I think the fans were
happy. And then as we
transitioned, you know,
Overwatch League was
the best intention. You know, my parents always
say, "The road to hell is paved with good
intentions." That was the Overwatch
League, and it ended up being an
albatross. And then
Overwatch 2 is the same
thing. And what it boiled down
for me, like what sort of
ultimately broke me in my Blizzard career
was I got called into the CFO's office,
and he sits me down and he says, it, he
gives me a date, which at the time was
2020 and was going to
slip to 2021, but at the
time, it was 2020. And he
said, "Overwatch has to make
in 2020, and then every year after
that, it needs a recurring revenue of
." And then he says to me,
"If it doesn't do dollars,
we're gonna lay off a thousand
people, and that's gonna be on
you." And that was just the biggest
fuck you moment I had in my
career. It felt surreal to be in that
condition. And as somebody who's worked on a
lot of games, made a lot of games,
you get in these meetings where they're
like, "There's Fortnite has 1,400
people working on it. If you just hire
1,400 people and make it
free-to-play, we'll make that
money, right?" And that was, I had
believed I would never work
any place but Blizzard.
I loved it. It was a part of who I was,
And I felt I was a part of it,
and I literally thought I would
retire from the place. I never
thought the day would come, and
that was it. I was like, it's,
we're done here. Luckily for Blizzard,
that CFO is no longer there.
- I mean, Blizzard is one of the greatest
companies in the history of Earth. They've
created so many incredible
video games. It's so
difficult to create so many
hits, and they were done
not by chasing money. They're
done by small incredible teams,
the hodgepodge that you describe
taking big risks and falling in love
with the thing they do and then
just chasing it, working
extremely hard. And
just because you figured out a way how
to make a lot of money doesn't mean it's
not, at the core this
incredible creative journey
that's incredibly difficult
to pull off. And just
because you got a bunch of
really smart creative people who
have somehow figured out how to pull
it off multiple times in a row doesn't
mean you can just treat it like
a machine. Every single time,
it's this beautiful journey of a hodgepodge
of weirdos working together, and
weirdos have to run that thing. If you
have, ever have a chance to create
something special, you have to have
weirdos at the helm. And it, it,
the degree to which you don't have
weirdos at the helm,
creative minds at the helm,
And you're a businessperson
at the helm, get out of their
way, right? You can't, you cannot
have the meetings like you're
describing. And I don't just
speak about this particular
company. It's just the
entire industry. I just,
there's so much joy to be had
if we keep creating great
games, and I just hope we get
to see those great games.
- I think there's a message to
creative people out there and
people who make stuff. We're generally,
we're so focused on the love of the craft
that we get lost in it and we love
doing it, and we're not cutthroat
and we don't have that kind of ambition.
We have a different kind of ambition.
But there's this whole world, especially
as soon as you're lucky enough to have
success, that are very cutthroat and
very ambitious. And for whatever reason,
we keep giving ourselves to them,
and we need to stop giving our
so... World of Warcraft, when
we made it, there was no
CFO at Blizzard. You
don't need a CFO to make
World of Warcraft. You need
artists, engineers, designers,
producers, and an audio team.
- You don't need to bring in... Just because you're
making a lot of money doesn't mean you need to
now start adulting by bringing
in a CFO. You can figure it out.
- And there are great finance guys. Like
I've worked with finance guys who get
it and get out of the way and
respect, and they're gamers,
and they sort of understand, but like,
I wish developers would
understand their own value more
and stop handing the golden goose
to people who don't deserve it.
- How painful was it to say goodbye?
- Uh, it broke me. I think after you've
been at a place like Blizzard, which
I love Blizzard. To this day, I
have nothing but warm, fond
memories. I mean, there's those
moments where you're like, "I
wish that hadn't happened," but
on the whole, that place is mecca for
game development, and everything I have
is due to Blizzard. They provided for me
and my family, made me the person I am, so
separating from Blizzard was one
of the most painful things. And
I was very sad when I resigned,
and I didn't realize how broken I
was until recently, like the mourning,
grieving I had gone through of
like...I think I'm a little
fucked in the head for not being
there any... How could I give that up?
How could I not be there anymore? It
It was really, really painful leaving.
- Can we just speak to,
I don't know, I don't think we can
give enough love to Blizzard. It's a
legendary company.
For me personally, for everybody, for
millions of people, created some of the
greatest games ever, Warcraft,
StarCraft Universe, Diablo, WoW,
Overwatch. What made it such a
legendary game company? Just
looking back at the whole of it?
- The start is Mike, Allen, and
Frank. It was run by three
gamers. They were, all three of them,
programmers. They made the games before
they just ran the company,
so they knew what each
of us as developers beneath them were
going through, and they protected us.
They shielded us from all of the nonsense,
and even when they would align
with a businessperson, they had a
COO in the early days named Paul
Sams, and Paul protected us.
You know, they just, they found
great people who got it. The
company when I joined was, like, 95%
developers and, like, 5% operations. It's,
when I left, it was, you know, 50/50, and
that's like a 4,500-person company. That
love of the games and the respect and
good treatment for game developers
really turned it into the place that it
was, just the commitment to excellence,
the high-quality bar and then finding
these passionate people like Chris
Metzen or Sam Didier, they were, like,
the visionaries of early
Blizzard, Allen Adham, of
just these worlds that we're still
making and we're still playing in today.
it was infectious and it was inspirational,
and you wore the Blizzard blue with an
esprit de corps. Like, you
felt proud to be part of it
and you felt like you
had made it to be there,
and everything you did, you did wanting to
respect and honor those
who had come before you.
I know that sounds almost
cheesy saying it that way,
but it really had that sense of reverence,
like you knew you were part of something
special. You didn't take it for granted.
- Yeah. That's the sense. Reading everything, that's
the sense I got. Everybody there was a part of it
that truly, truly, truly honored that time.
Just to take a small slice, what were
some of the brain... So you mentioned Chris
Metzen. You gave so much love to so many
people on the team, but I gotta ask about
Chris Metzen, who I would, by the way, love to
do a podcast with at some point.
What were the brainstorming
sessions with him like? It seems
like those are pretty like, awesome.
- They were the best. Like, you could walk
into a room. Like, the way
I would work with Chris
is early on when I was more
junior, it was just sort
of getting creative direction from him.
"Hey, Chris, I'm about to work on this zone
called Westfall. What are
your ideas? You know,
how could I capture them in gameplay? Well, that won't
quite work. How about like this?" It was more like
that. Later on, like, I still remember,
the first discussion I ever had
with Chris about Wrath of the Lich
King, I went up to his office like,
"Hey, we're finally doing it. We're
doing the Northrend expansion.
You know, what excites
you about Northrend?"
And that's all you had to
say. And he would draw a map
and he'd start pulling up
old, like, Warcraft II and
Warcraft I manuals and, you know,
showing you, like, pictures
he and Sammy had drawn and, like, maps and
he, all of it, he would just go on
for an hour and then I would sort of
digest. I'd just listen, taking constant
notes. I'm photographing
his whiteboards all the
time, and then I go back and start to put
those into design flow of, like,
"Okay. What's a zone? What's
a dungeon? What could be cool? What
should come first? What should come
last?" You know, Lich King, for example,
we wanted to try a very specific
design to counter a problem we had in
Burning Crusade, which is everybody
entered through the Dark Portal
through Hellfire Peninsula, all
the server programmers hate you
because everybody loads into the same
zone at the same time. Lich
King, we split them up for
better player flow. Plus, it's more
interesting the more choice you have.
You know, Sid Meier says, "Games are a
series of interesting choices," so we
give them two starting zones, but
that was the flow with Chris.
And so often we would just,
like, okay, in that first meeting,
Chris had put a zone called
Grizzly Hills on the board. Well, I
don't know anything about Grizzly Hills.
"Hey, Chris? Talk about
Grizzly Hills." If you
didn't interrupt him, he'd just go for an
hour. And you have no idea
how much of it, like, he
had pre-thought about or had
existed in previous lore
and how much of it he was
just making up on the spot.
He's just that charismatic
and captivating.
- Creating these worlds and being able to-
... brainstorm through them and together,
I mean, that is what you're doing.
As a consumer of those worlds,
you kind of take it for granted
that they're incredible, but,
like, you're crafting them.
Like, you're looking at a blank sheet
of paper and then together coming up...
- My job, as I saw it
working with Chris, was I
had to on World of Warcraft
specifically working with Chris,
is I was like the
translator into gameplay of
what Chris wanted, how to get it
to play like how Chris wanted.
So my favorite story is we're
working on Burning Crusade and
we're in this meeting and
Chris is like...He's the
gentlest, sweetest guy, but because he
carries himself with such confidence
and everybody's in awe of him, the junior
developers get kind of intimidated
by him. So we're in this
meeting and we're talking about Silvermoon
City because we're introducing the blood
elves, and Chris is like, "And Silvermoon
City's got the tallest fucking
tower in all of Azeroth. I
mean, it is the tallest
thing. You know, it's
mind-blowing, the awe of it.
Only the blood elves could build
it." Fast-forward like two weeks
later. I'm walking through
the hall and I see a bunch of level
designers and artists are all like
crowded around the screen, and on the screen
they've dragged Blackrock Mountain and
Karazhan and the Stormwind Cathedral.
I'm like, "What the fuck are
you guys doing?" And they're
like, "Well, Chris said that the
Silvermoon Tower had to be the
tallest thing in World of Warcraft-"
"... and so we're measuring how
tall all of these other things
are so we can make the tower
taller." And I'm like,
"Guys, Chris doesn't know how
tall the Burning Steppes, you
know- ... and the cathedral in Stormwind-
... is. What Chris means is just
make the tower really fucking tall."
"You don't need to measure it." And
they're like, "Oh, okay. That's okay?"
Like are you willing to take
the heat if he- I'm like, "I'm
willing to take the heat
on this one, guys."
- Yeah. It's just a feeling.
It's a vibe. It's-
- It's a vibe.
- Yeah. And I also just personally have
to give all the love in the world
for the current Diablo IV team, because
I've spent most recently out of
the Blizzard games, I've spent a
huge amount of time in Diablo, and
they've created some... And it's not
just the loot, all right? It's the
whole experience, the art, everything
together. And the seasons they've created,
they've created a really wonderful world.
So I can, I could see, I could feel
how much effort goes into that.
- They're crushing it. And I
think Diablo IV in like modern
times is one of the best worlds
that they've built. And they know,
they understand Diablo players.
Like that community is so hard and so
demanding, and that team is amazing.
- Yeah, there's a lot of richness. It's like
there's this really... I mean, I don't know how
often you get that, but it's really the
perfect Diablo game. They've really
like evolved a lot, grew a
lot. So there's this whole
mathematical component
of just so many numbers
everywhere and it's all balanced
really masterfully. And then
all, of course you have to come up with new
content with the seasons and they figure out
ways to do that, so and, and, and a
crazy pace. And still make it super fun.
- They're a great live team, yeah.
- And for me personally, like I said, the co-op,
the couch co-op experience have been really
like that aspect of it is really
great, just all of it. It's one, one
of the greatest games in recent
history. One of the things I
wanted to mention, 'cause
this is a powerful speech
is sort of instead of doing
some kind of a corporate
goodbye as you were leaving Blizzard,
you allegedly shared with your
team a video of David Bowie giving
advice. And people should go watch
this clip. But if I may read
it, Bowie says, "Never play to the
gallery. Always remember that
the reason that you initially
started working was that there was
something inside yourself that you
felt that if you could manifest in
some way, you would understand more
about yourself and how you
co-exist with the rest of
society. I think it's terribly
dangerous for an artist to fulfill
other peoples' expectations. I
think they generally produce their
worst work when they do that.
And the other thing I would say
is that if you feel safe in the area that
you're working in, you're not working in the
right area. Always go a
little further into the
water than you feel you're
capable of being in.
Go a little bit out of your depth. And
when you don't feel that your feet are
quite touching the bottom, you're
just about in the right place to
do something exciting."
Speaking of which, you are
just about in a place to do something
exciting. After leaving Blizzard,
uh, you told me that you tried to take
some time off. How did that work out for
you?
- Not so well. My wife, who is
wonderful, told me I needed
to take at least a year off
and just, you know, I'd been going really
hard. I'd gone 19 years barely taking
vacation and I let Blizzard
consume me. And, you know, I was
crushed by leaving because
I loved the place, and
I didn't know what to do with myself.
I was pulling weeds in the backyard.
- Literally. Gardening.
- Yeah. Well, she won't let me garden
in the garden 'cause that's hers-
... but I'm allowed to pull the weeds.
So I got very good at that. I was very
proficient. And then of all
things, I cracked out on Call of
Duty Black Ops Cold War
and I unlocked Dark
Matter Ultra, which I'd- that's like a
crazy achievement to do in that game.
So I did that, and then I just,
I couldn't help it, like it's
how I'm programmed. It was
like at this point it's late
spring, early summer and I'm just
sitting in the backyard and I just
started writing with Notepad about
here's a game I want to make.
And it was so terrifying
because for 19 years I had worked with the
greatest developers, I thought, in the
industry. And, you know, there'd be
moments where it's like, "Okay, I
wanna do like a game world map."
Like, "Hey, Erin, you're amazing at
making game world maps. Like, you
do that." And you know,
I, like, "I need some
story hooks. Hey, Chris, what do
you think would be cool here?"
Like, you know, it's so collaborative and I
was surrounded by the best of the best, and
there I was by myself. And I was
out there again, and I loved it.
It brought all the joy of game
making. I thought games were no
longer fun to make because
it was only about business,
and somebody's asking me for
unreasonable amounts of money and
unreasonable amounts of time.
And I had forgotten the pure joy
of the craft of making games, and
I was designing, I was going on,
I was watching YouTube videos
to learn Unreal and Adobe
Illustrator and all
these things to like help me make games,
whatever, Blender. Um, I had no right to
be doing any of that, and
it just felt so amazing to
do it. And I sort of realized, I
came to two realizations. One,
I never wanna work for someone
else again. I never wanna
create something and then have
somebody take my baby away from
me, you know? That's really
hard when- when that
happens, and it's sort of happened a
few times now, you know, where you
have to just let something
go that you created.
And I wanted it all to be focused
on the craft of making games, the
art, programming, design, audio, you
know? Like, just not about the
bullshit of the games industry.
I'm not interested in the games
industry. I'm not interested in
the business of games. I'm not interested
in the entertainment industry. It's just
game jamming, making stuff that we're
gonna play together. And around that
time, my I call him my development soulmate.
There's a programmer named Tim Ford.
He reached out and he's
like, "Hey, man..." He was
like an associate tech
director on Overwatch at the
time. And he's like, "Yeah,
I don't think I can do this
anymore. It's just not like it was,
you know, I just handed in my notice."
And I'm like, "Whoa, you
know, well, if you wanna do
something together, like fuck
it. Let's take a stab and, you
know, just see what happens." And
Tim came over to my house, and well,
before that, he says, "My
last day's on Friday."
"And my exit interview's at like 1:00. I'm
gonna be over to your house
at like 2:00 that afternoon."
And I'm like, "Well, don't you think
you should take some time off, Tim,
you know, before whatever's next
for you? Take a month off, you
know? Meg, his wife, will
appreciate it, you know?
Just go pull weeds in
the garden for a while."
And he's like, "I'm a programmer. All
I'm gonna do is program for a month if
I take a month off. I might as well
start programming our game." Which-
- Brilliant
- ... it was so awesome when he said that.
- Brilliant.
- He came over and I pitched
him this idea for a game, and
I pitched him, "Let's start a company."
And that was it. Like, that was the birth
of us making a studio.
- Now, meanwhile, as far
as the outside world is
concerned, you've disappeared
off the face of the
Earth, but you were
actually working on a game.
- Yeah, I needed to be away from
the world. I needed to not
have... I wanted to not get attention from
anyone. I needed to not read my name
on Reddit or... you know, any internet
site. I wanted to not come up, let some
other Jeff Kaplan bubble to the top-
... of the Google, you know, search list.
- You know our man Dinoflask is gonna
be all over this conversation, right?
- Oh, God, well, there's, yeah, this-
this one's gonna set him back some
time. But, yeah, I needed-
- You know what to do.
- Uh, I needed for none of that to
happen. I just needed to be able to,
like, mourn the loss of Blizzard- ...
and create on my own so it was great.
And at that time, like as soon as
it was announced that I was leaving
Blizzard, I had like 60 people reach out
to me. It was, this was April of 2021
and investment money was
nuts, both like the VC money
and the strategic money was
crazy, like the, especially the
Chinese companies, because
apparently they weren't getting,
publishing numbers in China or
something. The whole economy
was crazy, and so just
everybody was trying to throw
money at me, which was a very good position
to sort of be at to start a company. So
what Tim and I did was say,
"We're not doing this for
money, but here's the game
we wanna make, and it's
gonna take this many developers, and we think
it's gonna take this length of time, and
that means the budget
is this. And we need,
for any of these people who
wanna invest in us, we gotta hit
that number, but after that, we're
not gonna go for more money. It's
not an auction to raise as high as we can
go. We're gonna optimize for control."
- I don't know if this is something
that you can talk about, but I
got a chance to see the
game for a few hours,
and I have to say it's
incredible.... Jeff. Like, it's
incredible. But I almost immediately
fell in love with the world
and everything I saw. See, I'm
tempted to say some of the things I
saw but it's just an incredible
game. So how much can you talk
about it? Do you know what it's going to be
called? Can you talk about that? Do you know about
the company? Are you
allowed to say any of that?
- Sure. The most unconventional way to
talk about this stuff for the first
time. So, our company name is Kintsugiyama,
which most people will struggle to
pronounce.
- Nice.
- And the company name has a deep meaning
to me, which I'm happy to explain
later if you're interested. And the
game name that we're working on,
it's called The Legend
of California, and it's
an open world game. People
are gonna call it a survival
crafting game. People
like to compartmentalize
these. I think it's an
action game. It's a game
that takes place on a mythical
island of California.
- Mm-hmm. In the 1800s.
- In the gold rush. If you're trying to-
- In the gold rush.
- ... if you're trying to nail the most
important time in California history,
it's gotta be that gold rush.
- So, it's this beautiful,
almost ultra-realistic
version of California, but it's in an
alternate history, alternate version of
California- ...where it's an island,
almost like an Atlantis type
of ethereal island, but still very realistic
to what the California terrain is-
... and that time period.
So it's this weird like
amalgamation of this
ultra-realistic and the surreal.
- The theme of the game is very weird.
We're not trying to make a historical
game. There's no historical
accuracy to this. In fact, the
island when first discovered
is uninhabited. That's
already not true. As we
know, there were lots of
people in California. It's an
island, which we know is not
true. We want it to feel authentic to
that time period because we
think that time period is cool.
Prospectors, you know, cowboys.
Like, it's a really fun
thing for us to explore, all
of those themes people
in mines. We wanna build
mines and we just wanna
create a world that you can
live in. I love creating
worlds. Everything that
I've worked on before,
from World of Warcraft
to Overwatch, it's always been,
how do you create this place for
players to escape to, so.
- So, it's an online, multiplayer game.
I should say the experience of it
is just gorgeous, and then
the music is wonderful.
- I'm glad you like it.
- And one of my favorite things is just
going down to the mine and digging.
I mean, that's done ex- extremely well.
And as you described, the
whole world is voxels,
so it's generated. Can you
explain how that works?
- Yeah. As a world, we handcrafted
the world, so like the shape
of California is always the familiar
shape of California, except it's an
island. So, you know, there's
no Nevada on, on the eastern
side. We handcrafted all
of that. It looks gorgeous
and places like Yosemite
are where you would expect
Yosemite to be. And so
all of those familiar
landmarks are there, but then we have
like dozens of points of interest, and
those move around the map
in, depending on the map
seed. And the map is also
tiered in, in terms of
difficulty. We don't really have
levels in this game. We have
tiers, and there's only four tiers
right now. Maybe, maybe that will
change. But the way that the map tiers
itself each time changes with every
world seed. So not only... Any
server that you join will have a
different seed in terms of
how the tiers play out.
So, Mojave might be the
easiest newbie area
on your server, but on my server
it's endgame, tier four area.
But all of our notable points of interest
also move around. So, we have a really
amazing point of interest that we
call Dread Rock that's inspired by
Alcatraz. And like, sure,
sometimes it's in San Francisco,
but sometimes it can be sitting in
the middle of the Mojave Desert also.
- Mm-hmm. It integrates it into the
environment, to where it makes sense-
... to be in that environment. And
like you said, so much of what
makes a world is sound and lighting.
And that's definitely a thing that I've
noticed. I mean, it's probably the
most beautiful sunset and
sunrise I've seen in a game.
- We have a great lighting artist
who's this amazing guy named Mike
Marra, and some of the
inspiration for the game
like... There's a lot of inspirations for
this game, but there's a painter named
Albert Bierstadt, who I
discovered while researching
California, and he painted these just epic
landscape pieces of, you know, Yosemite
and a lot of other, the gorgeous parts of-
- Yeah, we're looking at one photo of his.
- Yeah, it's just amazing, and his
paintings were huge, too. Um, I'd
love to see one in person.
- And so you see a painting like that and
you're saying, "We wanna create that world."
- Yeah. I mean, when I see that
painting, this is, this is what
video games brings to the
table. So, every art form that
evolves after another gets to
incorporate previous art forms.
Movies got to take sound
and, you know fine
art. We get to take everything,
including movies. So, you
know, it's, it's Katamari Damacy, the
art form. But like...I see a Bierstadt
painting, and I wanna
walk around that world. I
wanna see what's around the corner.
And our lighting artist, Mike,
he, you know, he sees these
pictures, and he's like,
"Okay. Yeah. Hold my beer." Like, "I'll
make it look like that." And he, and
he... We are all blown away by
the, like, how much impact just
the lighting. And I'm not an
artist, so I don't think about things
like the color theory, the lights, the
clouds, what all of that's bringing
to this. I just know I want
to live in that world, and these are the
types of worlds that we want to make.
- So, what do you want the tone of the
game to be, the feeling of the game?
- This is really different. It's,
it's been hard for people.
When people were talking to us
about, you know, they know me and
Tim, and they're, "Oh, the Blizzard
guys, the Overwatch guys. You, you're
making, like, a bright,
aspirational future
team-based hero shooter,
right?" And I'm like,
"Why would I want to do that?" I felt
like, first of all, respects to Blizzard,
and I don't want to try
to crib Blizzard and
make a pseudo-Blizzard
game, you know? This
is... I want to make a Kintsugiyama game,
you know? Me and Tim and this crack
team, you know, we're only 34 people.
We want to define what a
Kintsugiyama game is, and
this world seemed so inspiring
to us, you know? The
setting is really interesting.
You know, I think California can
be a game world. I think we can make it
beautiful and interesting.
We don't have to follow
history or geography. We can kind of do a
spin where, you know, it
feels authentic. We can
have guns that feel like they're
kind of from that time period,
but we're not spaceships
and aliens and steampunk.
That's what we would have done at Blizzard.
We're gonna be a little different here.
So, the tone of this
game, you know... Metzen
would describe Blizzard as the
hero factory. You know, we
make... And what he means by that is not
only are we making heroes, but we make the
players into heroes.
This game is gonna have an edgier
tone. You're gonna enter this world.
It's gonna feel lonelier.
It's gonna feel mysterious,
larger than you. You're gonna
feel small until you earn the
right to feel big. It's
gonna feel really dangerous.
You're gonna want to see what's over
that next hill, but if the sun is
setting, like, get to
shelter. Can't wait to get
back to my ranch and put my
cozy fireplace on and wait
till morning, you know? We
want more of that vibe.
- It's more solitary, almost
scary, but beautiful.
That mix, that tension. I hate
to ask this question, but
given our previous discussion
about a timeline slide,
but what do you think a timeline looks
like? When do you think it's possible
for somebody in the world to
be able to play this game?
- So, this is the beauty of
me and Tim kind of getting
to run the show and why
we're excited about it. Um,
we can kinda do whatever we
want- ... within reason.
Um, so we're just gonna kinda quietly
put it up on Steam and see what happens.
- Nice.
- You know, no, like, big
corporate marketing group
would ever think to do
that in a million years-
... without, like, some, you know,
$10 million announce or whatever.
We'll just kinda put it on Steam and
be cool if people wishlisted
it. There's my plug. And
then I think we are shooting to
have some sort of public-ish alpha
in March. And then our plan, and
something I'm really excited
about, 'cause I've never gotten to do
this before, we wanna put the game in
early access. Some people
hate early access and won't
touch it, and I understand it, and then
some people are like, "I wanna be in on the
ground floor and see the thing
from day one and watch it
evolve." So, we'll put it into early
access, and we'll just run that until
who knows, you know?
- Is it scary to you to have a
sort of game with some rough
edges out there in the wild where people
are interacting with it through the alpha-
... through the beta?
- Yes, and this game has more
rough edges, like, the
most rough edges we would have at Blizzard
is, like, showing it at BlizzCon, which was
heavily polished and
controlled. This is gonna be
more, you know, like, in development
than anything else I've
ever worked on. But that's-
- I love it.
- ... part of the excitement too,
you know? It's kinda like this
is, this is how the sausage gets made.
I mean, you're gonna see it front row.
- I'm gonna try to get myself
into the alpha somehow. Anybody
who is listening to this, I highly recommend
this game. You will not be disappointed.
The world itself is just beautiful. So,
whoever's behind it, you and Tim and
the team, are just doing an
incredible job. And thank you for
putting out rough versions
of it so we get to-
... not wait forever
for the perfect thing.
And because you feel in... You feel
like you're a part of it if you get the
imperfect thing. I'm one of the people
who like the imperfect. We get to see
the rough versions develop,
and we- and get to be a
part of the it developing. I saw the
logo. It's a mountain. Can you explain
the meaning behind the name?
- So, Kintsugi is a Japanese
craft of repairing broken
pottery. So there's a lot
of philosophy that goes
into it as well. And you know,
I wanna do a good job of
explaining it, but basically,
like, you take a broken piece of
pottery, and then they
would use golden joinery-
Um, like golden lacquer to put the piece
back together. And the thought
was rather than hiding the
scars, you make them
more beautiful. And the
philosophical parts that
sort of appealed to me with
that is there's a lot of me and Tim in
that, of... We're so appreciative for
our time at Blizzard, but we
didn't come away unscarred.
And there's also a
philosophy in Kintsugi that
nothing's ever perfect, and the
pursuit of perfection is actually a
mistake, and that there's beauty
in imperfection. And so I relate
that to myself personally. That's how I
feel in an aspirational way. I'm not saying
I've achieved it, but in an aspirational
way, I want to be that way. And I think
it's also an analogy for the making of
games. Like, it's a... Making of games
is a constant, pursuit of
imperfection. Game is never
gonna be perfect. Just ask the
players. They're very vocal
about it. And seeing the beauty
and the imperfections and the strength in
something that's been broken that can be
stronger.
- You had a heck of a difficult couple years
here. And so in some sense,
it represents that beauty
in imperfection. So everybody
listening to this I hope, I
hope you do have it out on
Steam. Go check out Legend of
California. Truly a beautiful
world. I'm so glad you are actually
creating this, low-key, quietly creating
this beautiful, incredible world.
Ridiculous question, but can we talk about
some of the greatest games of all time?
What... I mean, I know this is a bit
of a nerding-out kind of thing, and
I, outside of the games you've
been part of creating, I
think Blizzard has created some of
the greatest games of all time.
Outside of those, what do
you think are in the list?
- So there's one that's
the best. It's Legend of
Zelda: Breath of the Wild.
And then there's this list
of greatest games, Zork, Ultima, uh-
- So Breath of the Wild is the best, yeah?
- The greatest game ever made.
- What makes it the greatest
game ever made for you?
- Every aspect is so
thoughtful, so well designed.
The art matches the
design and the tech, and
even integrating with the
Switch in the way it does. How
do you keep making Zelda better?
How can Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of
Time exist and somebody make
an even better Zelda game?
The way you can chop down a tree
and float in a river, and, like,
the world is a toy and everything works
as you wished and hoped it would work.
And there's a narrative aspect
to it, and there's really fun
combat and action and itemization.
There's so many things
that that game gets right that
other games are lucky if they
get one of those things right, and are...
Become best in their genre just
for getting that one thing right.
And Breath of the Wild does
them all right and the best.
- There's a certain kinda lightness
to the way the world feels, the
openness of the world feels. That's
unlike any other game, right? That's
uniquely that company, uniquely that-
- Yeah. No one else-
- Because nobody else creates that. You're
right. Under the pressure of having
created a bunch of Zeldas that are, like,
really great games, to be
able to deliver once again.
- Nintendo is, like, the
Mecca. Like, they're the
best, you know? That's all there is to it.
- Do you understand how that company works?
- No.
- That they're not...
- I don't at all.
- Like, because, I mean, they've been around for
a long time and still to be able to deliver.
- I kind of rationally or irrationally
just worship. It's just sort of,
if it's from Nintendo,
it's gonna be great.
And even if my first impression is
like, "Wow, they're doing what weird
thing with the controller
this time," and then you get
your hands on it and you're like, "God."
My son and I, we both played Legend
of Zelda: Breath of the Wild,
and he makes games also. And we had
this moment where he's like, "I'm so
sad after I played it." And he's
like, "I know I'll never make
anything like this." And it's that
weird, like, you honor it so much
and think it's so great. Red
Dead was like that for me. Red
Dead Redemption 2 is... That's a game
I put on a shrine. Not just how
brilliant the game itself is,
but as a game maker, as
a craftsperson who makes
games, how the hell do you make that?
Like, only Rockstar with all the
years of making those types of game.
No one else can come in entry level-
... and compete with that. So that's-
- Purely single player,
narrative driven. So you also
respect that kind of, like, pure-
- Yeah. I don't give anyone a
pass. I feel like a lot of
gamers and game developers, like, if it
has writing, they're, they're like, "The
story's so good." I'm like,
actually, very few games have
great story. But Red Dead has
a great story. It's got great
character development. It's got
a good plot. And the dialogue is
like... It's like Tarantino-level-
... high-quality dialogue. So...Red Dead's
up there. I have my other games that
make the list for me, and
these are... Both these games
are... I would never tell you to
play them. EverQuest and Rust are
two of the most defining games to me and
my career and my life.
And Rust, I would never
recommend somebody go and play
it. Rust will come calling to
you if you are up to play it.
- It is a cult. It's 100% a cult.
- That's-
- It... When you are ready,
it will come down.
- It will come down. It will let you know.
- The sky will part. Okay.
- In Rust, you are considered a complete
noob that doesn't know what he's
doing- ... if you don't have a
thousand hours. Even a thousand hours-
... people would be like, "Oh, you only
have a thousand hours-" "... in that game."
Yeah. But Rust and a
lot of inspiration for
me in the game I'm
working on now, it... My
game is not like Rust in that it's not a
PvP-centric game, but it will have PvP.
- What aspect of Rust do you
draw inspiration from? Just...
- I love the resetting world. It's a-
... great game mechanic and it's one
that I want to evolve and work upon.
- How often is the world reset do you
think, in Legend of California?
- I don't know yet. Probably
every month. We want it to be
fast enough that you're not too
attached, but we wanna make it
rewarding. Like, the trick
is coming up with not
why am I upset that the world resets,
but why am I excited that the world-
... resets? And we know players
can get very angry about
resetting worlds, but anybody who's played
5,000 hours of Rust, like some of us the
resetting world is the magic. It's I
can't wait for the next reset because the
adventure starts all over again.
And if you wanna play the first
time with me, like, if we wanna
play World of Warcraft, and
I'm level 80 and you're level
one, there's no meaningful
experience we can have together,
but in Rust, we just wait for a
reset and we're both naked on the
beach, you know, from minute one.
- What about the experience of Rust
where you can have everything
taken away from you?
So that part that you-
- We're not doing that.
- Great, great. Because that
feels awfully stressful.
- See... I just lost the entire Rust
audience when I said we're not doing that
because-
... if you're a Rust player, you're not
thinking you're gonna lose everything you have.
You're thinking, "I'm gonna take
everything somebody else has." But-
- See, my perception of the Rust audience is
there's, like, three people, they're in a castle
somewhere. It's very exclusive group.
- They are highly skilled,
highly passionate... highly
knowledgeable, um... but yeah,
it's an inspiration for me.
That and EverQuest were define...
And I've... The amount of hours I've
logged in both those games are insane.
- What do you think has more hours
from Jeff Kaplan, EverQuest or Rust?
- Well, you said I was 6K on EQ, so
that puts me at... I'm at 5K in Rust.
- And, and also in that collection is Zork.
- Zork was... I mean, Zork, it
just brings me back to that old
IBM PC with my mom and my brother,
trying to figure out, you know,
like, how to keep the lights on or
else Agrue's gonna eat us, you know?
- Yeah. So certain games just capture
your heart and they stay with you
forever. What do you think is
the future of video games? So
there's a lot of conversations
about AI helping expand maybe the
storytelling aspects, the world
creation aspects, becoming a tool that
people can use more so.
Maybe creating more
believable NPCs, that kind of thing. But
also there's, as, as we've talked about,
the video game industry is changing
and evolving and trying to figure out,
well, there's the indie game makers that
will have more power of... Or these
larger game makers will have more
power, so what do you think the
future of games looks like?
- I think with AI in mind
in particular, I think
the current state of AI,
trying to integrate it into
development is mostly a hot mess.
But I do think that, you know,
games are a technology-driven art
form. And somebody much smarter than me
once described it, and I'm paraphrasing,
making a game is like making a movie
if you had to invent the camera every
time, because you're kind of inventing
the technology of your specific
game. And I think AI can play a role
in that, and it would be silly not to
look at it as an option. The
problem with AI right now is it's
overconfident in what it tries
to deliver. Like, it fooled
around, obviously like
everybody, like, you mess around
with, you know, ChatGPT and Gemini and
you fool around with some of the
art generation, and it's fun for
non-artists to fool around on Midjourney.
But it's mostly weird and shitty. And
even, like, when trying to have AI answer
for me... Like, I don't normally make UI
in a game, and so I'm trying
to figure out, like, UMG and
Unreal Engine and I'm asking
ChatGPT to how to, how
to fix, like, a simple problem, like,
how do I make the chat wrap, you
know? And it, like,
overconfidently gives me the wrong
answer. And it's, like, right one in 10
times. So its hit rate has to be a lot
better. Um, I think there's a lot of
moral concerns around AI when it comes to
creative pursuits as well, like no one's
creative work should ever be used by
AI without their permission. You know,
voice actors and artists, it can't
be lifting from them without
their permission. That's just
immoral. It's no different than just
sort of stealing. So that's wrong. I
think. I'm curious, like
especially as somebody who runs
a small studio with 34 people, it's
like, what are the points
of tedium that maybe AI
could help out with that I
don't wanna do, and I'm not
gonna hire someone to do? So I
have, like a really dumb example,
I'm making a bunch of
images, I size them all
incorrectly 'cause I'm dumb and I'm
not an artist, and I did it all in
Photoshop, and I have like
2,000 images that are the wrong
size. I can have ChatGPT resize
those and zip it in a file for
me, and it literally takes
it like a minute to do that.
I wasn't gonna hire an intern to do
it. I was just gonna work an hour
later or two hours later that
night to do it. Like, it made
my life easier. It didn't take a job.
That seems okay. As long as that ethical
line stays in place, what
I- what I don't worry about
is, no matter how good AI
gets, never gonna draw a
picture like Arnold Tsang. It's
never gonna tell a story like Chris
Metzen. You know, that human
spirit is irreplaceable.
- Yeah, it's hard to put into words what
is that magic that humans produce, but
they do. Truly great creative
minds, truly great creative
teams, they create something
special. It's hard to really
articulate exactly what's
missing with with AI, you know,
what people call AI slop.
'Cause it creates really beautiful
imagery and beautiful stories, and very
believable text. But it's not quite...
It doesn't have that, I don't
know what it is, the edge that's
human. Maybe it's the imperfections.
- Yeah, I think so. Like AI to
me right now currently, it's
it's like an interesting
fever dream, you know?
- Yeah. Yeah.
- That's at the point I'm at with it.
- And a useful tool for the
mundane tasks, like you said.
But do you think the small studios
have hope in the future of gaming?
- Small studios are the future
of gaming. The big studios
basically acquire the small
studios for new IP and
ideas, and the small studios grow in. The
really compelling, new, innovative ideas
are gonna come out of small studios.
- What advice would you give to video game
creators, small teams, if they
wanna create a truly special game?
- Well, they know how to do it.
I mean, if they're doing it,
they know how to do it. It's
more to video game developers in
general, own the craft. Own our art
form. Stop giving it to these fucking
corporate jackals. You are the
golden goose. Keep your eggs.
- Jeff, formerly from the
Overwatch team, I have to
say from the bottom of my heart,
and I think I speak for millions of
people, thank you for everything
you've created in this world. Now
that I've gotten the chance to see the
new game, I can't tell you how excited I
am to try it. Thank you for everything
you've created. Thank you for everything you
represent. Thank you for
remaining and fighting
for us as one of us. So thank you,
and thank you for talking today.
- Thank you, Lex.
- Thanks for listening to this conversation with
Jeff Kaplan. To support this podcast, please
check out our sponsors in the description,
where you can also find links to
contact me, ask questions,
give feedback, and so
on. And now, let me leave you
with some words from Franz Kafka,
"Don't bend. Don't water it
down. Don't try to make it
logical. Don't edit your
own soul according to the
fashion. Rather, follow your most intense
obsessions mercilessly." Thank you for
listening, and hope to see you next time.